Although not supported by conventional efficient market hypothesis, empirical evidence suggests that stock returns can be predicted. Number of researchers have focused their attention on past returns or seasonal regularities to forecast future stock performance, bringing attention to anomalies such as day-of-the-week effect, week-of-the-month effect, turn-of-the-month effect, holiday effect, January effect, Halloween effect, or “the other” January effect. In his study, Zakamulin (2022) examines predictability of stock return from a different perspective, using both past returns and seasonal patterns in the stock market. He finds that excess return in given month is predicted by the monthly excess return at a certain lag, lag 5 specifically. The important observation is that the predictive power varies from month to month, with December, January, April, June, July and August being the best predictors. Author hence believes in connection to other seasonality/calendar effects. The predictability appears to be market-wide and active strategy seems to work best on portfolios of large and growth stocks. However, the results of this study indicate a decline in the profitability of given strategy over the past 20 years.

Fundamental reason
As for the explanation of this strategy, we must not forget that Lag(5) forecasting power has only been examined very recently. Author himself states, “the explanations for this anomaly are yet to be found” (Zakamulin, 2022). The anomaly has persisted in the US stock market for about 150 years and as suggested in the paper, it could stem from a data-mining exercise. According to the results, the anomaly is not driven by common risk factors and to understand it better, we shall turn to the area of behavioral finance. Despite similarities in their performance, success of Lag(5) strategy cannot be explained by the momentum effect as it is the case for MOM(12). The author believes that predictive power of 6 out of 12 calendar months at lag 5 contributes to the explanation of MOM strategy’s superior performance.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the S&P Composite index from William Schwert and CRSP.
The trading rule is straightforward, if the return of the index with lag 5 is positive, invest in the index. Additionally, there is research that the months with the most substantial forecasting ability are December and January, predicting the returns in May and June. However, this modification is not closely researched from the portfolio`s performance perspective.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -