Michael A. Gayed, CFA, is the 2020 NAAIM Founders Award Winner and 2020 Dow Award Finalist. His paper (2020) discovers that momentum is often touted as the ideal anomaly to take advantage of using sectors to express an active bet on continued performance. Mean reversion using the VIX to overweight or underweight sectors ultimately outperforms the mean of a passive strategy. From three various tested methodologies and strategies (dollar-neutral, sector-rotation, the sector overweight and underweight), all of which come to the same conclusion around using extreme VIX levels as trigger points to determine how aggressive or defensive to get with sector allocations, we select the third, last mentioned one. (The static and the rolling trigger levels methodologies also exist to select further from.)

Fundamental reason
The author finds that an approach that waits for momentum to crash with a VIX spike allows for an ideal setup to buy low and sell high when investor overreactions occur. While one can never know the exact moment an extreme period of volatility and collapse in stocks occurs, one can be confident that it is worth being defensive before it happens. After it does, going full speed ahead when all is clear becomes the preferred way of positioning a portfolio until another extreme is reached.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe contains cyclical sectors, such as Technology [XLK], Industrials [XLI], Materials [XLB], and Consumer Discretionary [XLY] (which tend to outperform when investing during periods of high volatility), while defensive sectors, such as Utilities [XLU], Consumer Staples [XLP] and Healthcare [XLV] (which at the same time tend to underperform).
(The SPDR sector ETFs [in angle brackets] are used to mirror the actual returns that one would generate. Data might be easily obtained via Yahoo Finance.)

0. Broad overview: Use the VIX as a sector allocation tool. The sector rotation strategy allocates 100% to either the cyclical or defensive indexes.
1. The Trigger: When the VIX is at a particular level, certain sectors outperform in the subsequent 12 months. With this in mind, an optimal trigger level must be defined for when cyclical sectors are expected to outperform defensive sectors in the subsequent periods. An additional trigger is required for when one should switch positions from cyclical sectors to defensive sectors. To do this, Nelder-Mead optimization is performed over a learning period. Two methods were used to determine the learning periods applied. The first is a static period between January 1, 1999 to December 31, 2004. The second is a rolling 5-year period, with the first period between January 1, 1999 to December 31, 2004. Subsequently, the oldest month is dropped, and a new month is added, with the final rolling period being September 1, 2014, to August 31, 2019. This means that the trigger level will vary over time. Moreover, you should adjust it accordingly (see Table 4: VIX Trigger Levels; VIX ranging from 12 to 36).
2. Perform All-In Sector Rotation Strategy: The sector overweight and underweight strategy sets the cyclical index weight to 100% of its respective S&P level when the entry trigger level is met while liquidating the defensive index weight to 0% and inverts this when the exit level is met. (Because it is a full sector rotation, these weights remain 100% until the next switch.)

The performed portfolio is equally weighted but always has only one position, and is dynamically based rebalanced depending on signal.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Strategy itself has a subgoal to perform well in constrained periods of market overturns: The same underlying themes are seen here. There is movement from defensive to cyclical sectors during the subprime crisis. In most of the subsequent periods, defensive stocks are held, barring a few short periods when they are rotated into cyclical stocks.