The concept of volatility is often understood as a risk measure. However, there are two contradicting strands of literature. One strand assumes that the higher risk is compensated by higher returns, while the other has identified a low risk (low-volatility, betting against beta …) effect. These two strands of literature are mostly related to the traditional assets, but how is the volatility affecting the novel crypto market? Cryptocurrencies are regarded as highly volatile, which is why the novel research that examines the implications of realized volatility in the cryptocurrency market can be crucial for crypto traders.
The authors examine the volatility and jump risks among the highest market-cap cryptos based on the high-frequency data. Although the theory stems from the Brownian motion and Poisson process, the research quickly shows how to estimate realized semivariances and signed jumps. The most important finding is that the good volatility (positive semivariance) or high signed jump variation are negative predictors of subsequent cryptocurrency performance.

Fundamental reason
The most common risk metric is volatility, which measures both positive and negative variation of returns. The volatility consists of the “good” volatility, which is a positive semivariance, and “bad” volatility, which is the negative semivariance. The research has identified that for predicting future realized volatility, the positive semivariance is more important than the bad volatility. The authors have identified that the higher positive semivariance or higher signed jump variation leads to a higher realized volatility in the future. On the other hand, higher negative semivariance and minor signed jump variation lead to lower future volatility.
Greater “good” volatility and signed jumps can be deemed attractive, especially when one hopes that the jumps will repeat. However, this bet often has little fundamental support and leads to higher uncertainty. Overall, it seems that the usual scheme, where the investors bet on the past performance and extrapolate it to the future, also holds in the crypto market. However, the reality is not that bright. There is more significant uncertainty, and the realized signed jump is a negative predictor of performance in the future.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 51 most actively traded cryptocurrencies with market cap over $1 million obtained from FirstRateData (research filters them to be “U.S. dollar-based”). The time interval for the realized volatility computation is 5 minutes. As the first step, compute the daily realized volatility (sum of squared returns) and the positive and negative semivariances (sum of squared returns multiplied by the indicator whether the return is positive or negative – equations on page 6). Next, compute the signed jump measure defined as positive minus negative semivariance. Finally, construct the realized signed jump measure (RSJ) as the signed jump divided by the realized volatility. Each day, sort the cryptos into quintiles based on their RSJ measure. Long the bottom quintile and short the highest quintile. The strategy is rebalanced daily and equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Probably not - Cryptos repeatedly show that they tend to correlate with the market, especially during crisis periods.