Driven by irrational behavior, asset mispricing is a prime target of many researchers. The recency effect is a behavioral phenomenon affirming that equity market participants perceive only the most recent events, albeit not paying equal attention to the earlier development. This novel research predicts the future evolution of stock prices based on past payoffs arrangement. Although Mohrschladt (2021) closely scrutinizes the recency effect in the U.S. market, this study augments his findings by examining the bias significance in international markets as well.
To analyze the correlation between the returns and the corresponding time, the chronological return ordering (CRO) variable was implied. The most important outcome of the paper is that stocks with lower current payoffs and higher past payoffs undoubtedly outperform the ones with opposite return development. The paper asserts that the phenomenon is present outside the U.S. market, but the most dynamic effect exists in the developed countries since the theory of recency bias does not hold in emerging markets. Moreover, the authors proved that the power of anomaly in actual countries depends on two determinants, namely individualism and investor protection. Regardless of the common anomalies’ nature, the effect runs in both large and small caps. As it remains robust and significant even in the most capitalized and liquid stocks, the CRO prediction can be prosperously implemented in practical portfolio management.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the irrational tendencies of investors explained by the recency bias. As they pay more attention to the recent market information, their actions lead to equities mispricing. If present payoffs are higher while older ones are lower, biased investors tend to overestimate the future stock prices, resulting in overvalued assets and vice versa. These short-term fluctuations are subsequently regulated by the arbitragers. Naturally, the strong evidence of the anomaly present during market crashes results in higher returns as a risk premium related to the plunge. Even though the recency effect was scrutinized by several authors even in the 20th century, the chronological return ordering approach is unique. The paper is the first one to analyze the CRO globally, inspecting 49 countries in total. Furthermore, several detailed robustness checks contribute to the overall high quality of the research. The phenomenon holds for both big and small companies, it is not driven by any specific industry and works throughout the whole examined period.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of global large-cap stocks of 49 countries (full list of counries is in Table 1). Firstly, each month, compute the Pearson’s product-moment pairwise correlation coefficient between daily returns of the stock and the corresponding time until the end of the month. The result presents the CRO variable value. The low values demonstrate low distant payoffs and high present payoffs, therefore, low CRO hints at low future returns. The opposite holds for the high CRO values. Subsequently, sort the stocks according to the CRO value in to deciles. Long the top decile with the highest CRO values and short the bottom decile with the lowest CRO values. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on the results of Table 11, the strategy is even more profitable during bear markets than during bull markets (both equally and value-weighted).