Liquidity has a significant impact on the price and valuation of stocks. Further, the academic research shows that we can consider liquidity to be a risk factor (the same way as value, momentum, and size factors). Stocks with a low level of liquidity are accustomed to earning larger returns than those with a high level of liquidity. Due to the high importance of this factor along with earning information, and prices it has dominated financial reports for ages. Many factor models have been developed and constructed with characteristics related to earnings, liquidity, momentum, and the market.
Novel research defines a return-based five-factor model referred to as ELM. Consequently, the authors build three and four factors versions of ELM. To explain stock returns, the cross-sectional model uses stock characteristics and their related rates of change. Moreover, the factors presented in the research could be utilized as investing strategies and, as a result, are interesting in practice. It is clear that liquidity, as measured by volume, is a significant aspect of an investor’s concern. However, the paper also recognizes the growth of liquidity, which it refers to as a risk factor. This factor could be utilized in a trading strategy, which is the main concern of this screener’s addition.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of this strategy is liquidity itself. Liquidity as a factor is essential for investors from the very beginning of market formations. Furthermore, the inclusion of liquidity in the description of equity returns in the potential reference factor model is beneficial for investors with a long-term interest in volume and extensive liquidity literature.
From the behavioral point of view, low liquidity growth stocks should be those that are unnoticed and should be connected with higher returns and high liquidity growth stocks should be overtraded and overrated, thus connected with lower returns. However, this behavioral story is not supported by the research, and the authors rather suggest that liquidity growth is a risk factor since investors are often concerned about the risk of liquidity growth. Moreover, the liquidity growth factor seems to be closely related to the momentum, and as a result, the authors state that it gives some indication of a possible risk premium for the liquidity growth factor.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). Firstly, construct the liquidity as monthly shares traded multiplied by the end of month price. Secondly, calculate liquidity growth (LIQG). If the cumulative return is higher or equal to zero, LIQG is calculated as the difference of liquidity of stock in month t and liquidity in the previous year in the same month, divided by the liquidity in the previous year in the same month. If the cumulative return is less than zero, LIQG is calculated as the absolute value of the difference of liquidity of stock in month t and liquidity in the previous year in the same month with a negative sign. The stocks are sorted into independent 2×3 stock sorts. Firstly, group stocks into liquid (the top 50% with the highest liquidity) and illiquid. Secondly, stocks are sorted into low (30%), neutral (40%), and high (30%) liquidity growth groups. The trading strategy goes long high liquidity growth (both liquid and illiquid) stocks and short the low liquidity growth stocks (both liquid and illiquid). The strategy is dollar volume-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The liquidity growth factor has a slightly negative correlation with the market factor (Table 3, Panel B)