An asset’s total return can be broken down into two components: current income and capital gains. Studies show that rational investors should be indifferent between these two sources of return. However, this core principle of financial economics is at odds with a large amount of popular retail investment advice that advocates a “rule-of-thumb” of living off the income stream from one’s investment portfolio, while keeping the principal untapped. Investors who follow this rule will necessarily structure their investment portfolio not only to maximize their risk-adjusted return but also to provide a level of current income which, when combined with their other sources of income, matches their desired consumption. Thus, when these other sources of income fall, for example, because of declines in interest rates, these rule-of-thumb investors rebalance their portfolio into higher current income assets. This behavior is labeled as “reaching for income” and is shown that this type of behavior generalizes to a large fraction of investors and affects the prices of income-generating assets.

In this paper, the impact of monetary policy on investors’ portfolio choices and asset prices are analyzed. Using data on individual portfolio holdings and mutual fund flows, it is found that a low-interest-rate monetary policy increases investors’ demand for high-dividend stocks and high-yield bonds and drives up their prices. Naturally, this effect can be anticipated and utilized in a trading strategy. The increase in demand is more pronounced among investors who fund consumption using dividend income. When accommodative monetary policy lowers interest rates, it reduces the income stream from bonds and induces investors who want to keep a desired level of consumption to “reach for income” by tilting their portfolio toward high-dividend stocks. The analyses suggest that low-interest-rate monetary policy may influence the risk premium of income-generating assets, lead to under-diversification of investors’ portfolios, and cause redistributive effects across firms that differ in their dividend policy.

Fundamental reason
Rational investors should be indifferent between the splits between current income and capital gain. However, investors are just normal people like anyone else and therefore they have behavior biases. Due to behavior bias, the study finds that many investors follow the rule-of-thumb of living off the income from their investments while keeping the principal untapped. This rule-of-thumb implies that investors may “reach for income” during low-interest-rate periods when the interest income from deposits and short-term bonds becomes insufficient relative to their desired consumption. Using data on individual stock holdings and mutual fund flows, the paper shows that the reaching for income phenomenon is widespread and economically important. The study documents large and persistent inflows to high-income-yield assets following interest-rate reductions, and reversals following interest-rate hikes, implying strong shifts in investors’ demand. Furthermore, is shown that changes in interest rates significantly affect the relative valuation of firms with different dividend policies. A theoretical model that shows that reaching-for-income behavior has important implications for monetary policy is constructed. By influencing the interest income from deposits and short-term bonds, monetary policy may affect consumption, portfolio choice, and asset prices even in an economy in which prices are fully flexible. Overall, the results add to a growing body of research showing that the monetary authority exerts a profound impact on the economy through the financial sector. To sum it up, the low interest rates subsequently lead to overpriced dividend stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). Firstly, identify rising or declining interest rate periods, based on the one-year change in the fed funds rate. Secondly, sort the stocks into deciles based on their dividend yield. For declining interest rate periods long the top decile (high-dividend stocks) and short the bottom decile (low-dividend stocks). For rising periods, long the bottom decile and short the top decile. Strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide information on whether the strategy can be used as a hedge to equities