The credit quality of a firm has a strong impact on the firm’s future performance. Various indicators are used to measure this credit/default risk. Academic research shows that the slope of the CDS term structure negatively predicts stock return. The portfolio that is long low CDS slope stocks and short high CDS slope stocks have statistically and economically significant returns. The resulting returns are significant even after controlling for various stock characteristics known to be related to the cross-section of the stock return. Research shows that the anomaly is persistent mainly in small volatile stocks, so it is not easy to capture the whole theoretical return spread, but a CDS slope factor could at least be easily used as a nice addition to other long-short equity factors in a multifactor stock-picking model.

Fundamental reason
Academic research postulates that a high CDS slope may indicate that investors expect the firm’s credit quality to deteriorate and CDS spreads to increase. Slow information diffusion causes the information content of the current CDS slope to be only slowly incorporated into stock prices.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks with liquid CDS contracts. The slope of the CDS term structure is measured by the difference between the 5-year CDS spread and 1-year CDS spread. Each month, stocks are sorted into deciles based on the previous month ending CDS slope. The investor goes short on stocks with the highest CDS slopes and goes long on stocks with the lowest CDS slopes at the previous month-end. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly, and stocks are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.