Value effect is a well-known market factor used to assess attractivity of stocks on a country level. Academic research uncovers that this effect could also be used to compare relative attractivity of country portfolios. We have already added one research paper using CAPE (long term cyclically adjusted PE ratio) methodology for such an assessment (see strategy 207). We are now adding paper exploring second methodology, better known to investors, based on Price to Book ratios calculated for whole country portfolios. The academic paper also explores size effect within-country portfolios. However, we have decided not to insert this effect into our database as we suspect it could be harder to trade as it expects investors to systematically hold and rebalance portfolios of countries with small market capitalization.

Fundamental reason
The anomaly has its source in investor psychology. Academic research postulates that investors overreact to news and events; “winners,” i.e. favourite countries, tend to be overvalued while “losers”, i.e. neglected countries, are undervalued. The contrarian investor can; therefore, exploit this generic investor mentality to capitalize on the inefficiency of the market to reap financial gains when stock prices revert to their intrinsic values.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of ETFs and local futures of 66 countries. Summary book to market ratios is calculated for each market from book to market ratios of stocks. Countries are then sorted on calculated country B/M ratios. Investor goes long 33% of countries with the highest country B/M ratios and short 33% of countries with the lowest B/M ratios. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly, and countries are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The long-only value stocks/countries logically can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high). Now, evidence for using long-short value factor portfolio as a hedge against equity market is very mixed. Firstly, there are a lot of definitions of value factor (from a simple standard P/B ratios to various more complex definition as in this strategy) and performance of different value factors really differ in times of stress. But there are multiple research papers in a tone of work of Cakici and Tan: “Size, Value, and Momentum in Developed Country Equity Returns: Macroeconomic and Liquidity Exposures” that link value factor premium to liquidity and growth risk and shows that the implication is that value factor returns can be low before periods of low global economic growth and bad liquidity.