Economic policy uncertainty (EPU) is the uncertainty about fiscal, regulatory, or monetary policy caused by government policymakers. It affects not only the economic activity but also the consumption and investment decisions of economic agents. Pástor and Veronesi (2013) developed a theoretical model where political uncertainty drives stock prices. In a related study, Bali et al. (2017) documented the negative EPU premium in the cross-section of stock returns in U.S. equities. In other words, stocks whose returns covary positively with economic uncertainty (i.e., positive economic uncertainty beta stocks) underperform stocks whose returns covary negatively with economic uncertainty (i.e., negative uncertainty beta stocks). Australian political history has undergone a turbulent time in past years compared to the world’s developed countries. This paper builds upon previous studies and examines the unconditional EPU premium and EPU premium conditioned by investor sentiment in the cross-section of Australian equities. The authors proxy investor sentiment by the changes in National Australia Bank Business Confidence Index (NBCI). They estimate EPU beta for Australian stocks using 12-month rolling regression of the excess stock returns on the log of the EPU index, along with several control variables. Similar to Bali et al. (2017), they have found the negative unconditional EPU premium. Specifically, the highest EPU beta quintile (high EPU beta stocks) underperforms the lowest EPU beta quintile (low EPU beta stocks) by 1.35% per month following low sentiment periods in a value-weighted quintile portfolio. However, this negative uncertainty premium disappears following high sentiment periods. Naturally, betting against uncertainty following low sentiment periods can be utilized as a profitable trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
The negative uncertainty premium suggests that uncertainty-averse investors require a return premium to hold negative uncertainty beta stocks while willing to pay high prices for positive uncertainty beta stocks. Brogaard and Detzel (2015) explain the negative EPU premium with strong (weak) intertemporal hedging demand for positive EPU beta stocks in low (high) sentiment periods. This hedging demand makes investors overpay the high EPU beta stocks, resulting in low subsequent returns. However, such behavior disappears in the high sentiment periods, which leads to a weak and insignificant EPU premium. Bali et al. (2017) ascribe the negative uncertainty premium to the limited (full) participation of pessimistic investors and investors with a high aversion to uncertainty in low (high) sentiment periods. Uncertainty-averse investors exit the market if economic uncertainty is sufficiently high. Consequently, stocks with high uncertainty beta would be held only by optimistic investors or investors with a low aversion to economic uncertainty. Hence positive uncertainty beta stocks will only require a low uncertainty premium, leading to low future returns. Additionally, the negative relation between EPU beta and future stock returns remains statistically significant even after employing Fama-MacBeth (1973) regressions controlling for size, book-to-market, momentum, short-term reversal, idiosyncratic volatility, illiquidity, demand for lottery-like stocks, total volatility, growth of total assets, profitability, and closing price. Last but not least, the predictive power of the EPU beta can last for at least a quarter.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all common stocks traded on the ASX. Firstly, compute the change of NBCI (ΔNBCI) by [(NBCIt / NBCIt-1) -1]. Then classify the sentiment period as high (low) if the value of ΔNBCI is above (below) the median ΔNBCI. Secondly, estimate monthly EPU beta for each Australian stock employing 12-month rolling regression of the excess stock returns on the log of the EPU index (Australian EPU index from the website of Scott R. Baker, Nick Bloom, and Steven J. Davis). At the beginning of the month, sort stocks into quintile portfolios according to their EPU beta in the previous month from low EPU beta to high EPU beta within each sentiment period. Buy the lowest quintile (low EPU beta stocks) and sell the highest quintile (high EPU beta stocks) during the low sentiment periods. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide any information related to hedging properties of the strategy.