After decades of not paying enough attention, the negative environmental externalities of modern production are getting more and more into peoples and companies awareness. Especially over the last few years, public meaning and image are becoming influenced extensively by corporate environmental responsibility (CER). Environmental activism not only brings direct benefit to society in protecting public health, but it can also enhance brand equity, firms reputation or even boost sales. However, all of this happens at some costs, and the question is: what outweighs the other? The benefits or the costs of environmental activism?

The answer to this question has been sought in paper from Taehyun Kim and Yongjun Kim (2020). Employing the changes in the volume of toxic emissions on the micro-level, the researchers try to evaluate the extent to which shareholders benefit from firms’ engagement in pollution reduction. Two types of tests are being run. At first, the paper tests the stock price reaction to Supreme Court rulings, that reshape the environmental regulations. The findings reveal that the market reaction is more significant for companies that are expected to be more affected by Court decision. In case of applying more restrictive arrangements, ﬁrms lacking adequate CER investments, which must improve their pollution abatement processes to a greater extent than cleaner ﬁrms, show the largest stock-price gains.
Secondly and more importantly for us, the paper employs portfolio sorts and runs cross-sectional regressions to investigate whether corporate CER actions intended to support sustainable growth are capitalized into share prices. The article reveals that investors can proﬁt by taking a long position in the “greenest” stocks and a short position in the most “toxic” stocks. This kind of distribution is made according to the changes in the total volume of emissions produced by all the company’s facilities in a given year and scaled by sales to take into account the overall production level. The greenest company is considered to be one, that reduces the number of emissions by most. These data can be obtained from the Toxics Release Inventory program administered by the Environmental Protection Agency. With respect to value-weighted returns, the alpha on such a long and short portfolio is 0.37% monthly (4.52% annually) from 1990 to 2016. Further examination shows that the alphas are more pronounced among ﬁrms headquartered in regions with high levels of social trust.

Fundamental reason
The reason behind these abnormal returns could be found in the continuous global change in peoples attitude towards the environment and growing awareness of the negative effects of emissions on our health and nature. As well with the rising number of environmental activism activities, it is fair to say, that going and behaving “green“ is becoming a trend and consumers tend to buy greener products more, even at the cost of a higher price. As a great example could be considered buying electric cars. The results from the study also support this fact, as they suggest that the preferences of consumers, workers, and investors drive the relationship between sustainability and returns. Going “green“ is not a process of a few days, but a one for a longer horizon. That is why it turns out, that greener ﬁrms tend to attract more capital from institutional investors who prioritize long-term value creation.

The results of the paper show as well, that institutional investors reduce their holdings in ﬁrms, which lower CER investments and increase the number of toxic material releases. It is also worth to mention that polluting ﬁrms tend to have poorer operating performance and more negative earnings surprises. In contrast, greener ﬁrms tend to show better earnings than the analysts’ forecasts. This suggests that investors initially undervalue greener firms, and the realized abnormal returns of the greener ﬁrms can be assigned to investor inattention to ﬁrm-level earnings growth.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks for which are available data about toxic releases (Toxics Release Inventory program administered by the Environmental Protection Agency). This group of companies is then sorted according to annual changes in the volume of emissions produced by all the company´s facilities in a given year and scaled by sales to take into account the overall production level. The investor goes long the highest quintile of companies (companies that reduced the emissions by most), and short the lowest quintile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced yearly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.