Applying a time-series analysis, the authors show that equity options trading on aggregate is related to investors’ sentiment trading. They find that aggregate equity call option order imbalance (ACIB), defined as the cross-sectional average order imbalance of equity call options, predicts significantly and negatively future stock market returns. The predictive power of ACIB is mainly driven by the sentiment spillover effect that options traders overbuy (oversell) options based on market status, therefore functioning as contrarian signals to future stock market returns. They find similar evidence using index options, albeit weaker. Investors can benefit substantially from using ACIB to adjust positions of risky assets over time, and our selected market timing trading strategy is only one of many different variants in which they can do so.

Fundamental reason
Previous studies find equity option trading activities are related to informed trading of their underlying stocks. Authors pursue new, exciting research and find their own methodology; ACIB has solid and significant predictive power to future stock market returns. Existing return predictors cannot explain its predictive power and is significant both in-sample and out-of-sample. ACIB is informative to neither future aggregate firms nor macroeconomic fundamentals but is closely related to investor sentiment. The authors’ findings complement existing cross-sectional studies that equity options trading is not only related to informed trading but also reflects investors’ sentiment trading from a time-series perspective.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P 500 tracking asset (SPY ETF or maybe CFD) and risk-free asset (ETF BIL or T-bills).
(The order imbalance is constructed using the equity option trading volume from CBOE. The Center for Research in Security Prices [CRSP] may obtain one underlying stock price data.)

1. The order imbalance of each individual equity option from end users on a certain day CIBi,t is calculated as the moneyness-weighted summation of total open buy trading volume less open sell trading volume divided by the sum of total trading volume across all moneyness and time to maturities from public customers (see eq. (1)).
2. Investor then calculates ACIB_t as in eq. (3) which is the sum of CIB_i,t and wi,t; that is, the weight by market capitalization for each option’s underlying stock i, calculated by the underlying stock price multiplying the outstanding shares obtained from CRSP.
3. Do the most commonly used multi-period predictive regression Fama and French (1988, 1989) as in eq. (7). The forecast target is the market excess returns (MKTRF) at the monthly frequency (M).
4. As a mean-variance-utility investor, allocate wealth between the market portfolio and T-bill according to formula (10). (Weight on the market portfolio is 1/3 [the relative risk aversion [factor] γ] of conditionally expected market excess return [i.e., forecast based on a predictor] given by ACIB divided by the variance of the five-year historical returns.)

According to the last mentioned formula, the portfolio is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The selected strategy is a class of “Market Timing” strategies that try to rotate out of equities during the time of stress. Therefore the proposed strategy isn’t mainly used as an add-on to the portfolio to hedge equity risk directly. Still, it is more an overlay that can be used to manage the percentual representation of equities (or “equity-like assets”) in a portfolio. “Equity Market Timing” strategy can decrease the overall risk of equities in a portfolio, and it can improve the risk-adjusted returns. Moreover, as strategy’s goal is to hold equity market only in a positive times for equity market factor and be out of equities otherwise, therefore this logic can be maybe used to create amended market timing strategy (using original rules) which is out of equities during positive times and holds bonds (or goes short equities) during bad times. This new amended strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. However, performance/risk characteristics and overall correlation and quality of suggested amended strategy can be found out only by rigorous backtest and source academic research paper doesn’t give us any clues on how it will perform…