Investing in indices represents a passive form of investing that is nowadays available almost to everyone and is becoming increasingly popular. Its main advantage is that the investor buys a diversified pool of stocks, so he does not have to perform demanding analyzes to pick the right stocks and regularly rebalance his portfolio. The role of rebalancing is taken over by the management of the index, which on a regular basis changes the composition of the index on the basis of a methodology, that is also available to the public. The theory of index effect says that stocks which are added to the index tend to outperform and those, which are removed tend to underperform. This presumption brings an exciting opportunity for investors to gain abnormal returns. Using publicly available data, the paper from Friedrich Carl Franz exploit this effect further on the DAX index family (DAX, MDAX, SDAX, TecDAX) from 2010 to 2019.

The recent literature results show that there are abnormal returns following the index composition change announcements, and such result holds true in all major indexes like SP500, FTSE 100, DAX, Rusell2000, Nikkei225, etc. This presumption is also supported by results from this paper, but more importantly, the paper presents a unique technique of how to predict these changes before they are announced. Among the companies, that are eligible to enter the index, Deutsche Börse creates a monthly ranking list to determine the respective index membership. This ranking is created upon data from the last trading day of the previous month. However, it is published together with the index change announcements after the close of trading on the third trading day of the month. So the investor has three days to calculate his own index changes predictions.

The ranking list is not available to the public before the announcement, but what is well-know is the methodology, that is used to compose this ranking. However, getting the same data that Deutsche Börse uses to build the ranking list is not straightforward. The data set obtained from public databases might be slightly different from the one, that is used for official ranking. The idea of the paper is to take the official ranking of the last month and add a difference between the custom computed rank of this month minus the previous month custom rank because the author assumes that the differences between obtained data from other providers and Deutsche Börse are constant. However, it is crucial to get the whole ranking right and not just the data of one potential change. For example, a promotion can be triggered by, e.g., the rise of the market capitalization of that promotion or by the decline of market capitalization by another stock that consequently has become a demotion. The aforementioned can be utilized by a trading strategy of going long/short the stocks that we predict to be added/removed from the index according to the custom ranking list. Last but not least, the model was able to correctly predict 45% of changes, and although the forecasting brings 27% of false positives, the total result is not significantly influenced by them, as they do not bring any negative abnormal returns. Further findings show that performed abnormal returns are higher in small stocks, and the changes, that were not expected by the forecasting model do not bring larger abnormal returns compared to correctly predicted changes. However, it is worth mentioning, that the forecasting performance is much better in the DAX index (that consists of stocks with largest market cap), where the accuracy is 71% and 16% are false positives.

Fundamental reason
According to Gromb and Vayanos (2010), there are at least two rational theories, that might explain these abnormal returns. First of them claims that investors should be awarded abnormal returns because they are exposed to additional risk, i.e., they collect a risk premium. If investors were profiting from predictable changes, the theory would suggest that the profits reflect a risk premium for bearing the risk of falsely predicting changes resulting in a loss. Abnormal returns for demotions are not significantly larger than for promotions, which indicate that short-sell restrictions are not the cause of these returns.
As an explanation could also be considered the fact, that the stocks added to indices gain more investors attraction, while the ones removed face the risk of slipping from investors eyes. The demand for newly added stocks also rises thanks to the index-tracking funds, that are obliged to include these stocks in their portfolio. On the other hand, the stocks that have been removed from the index are being removed from these funds as well. This increases the supply of these stocks on the market, what by the law of economics leads to a decrease in their price.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks, which are listed in Deutsche Börse’s Prime Standard, are continuously traded on Xetra, and have its legal or operating headquarter in Germany. The first step is to compute the custom ranks of stocks. The predicted ranking list for t-month is calculated followingly: official ranking list from t-1 month plus the difference between own customed rankings from month t and month t-1, composed from Bloomberg and Compustat data. On an announcement day (the third trading day of the month), go long on stocks, that you expect to be added to indices and go short on stocks that you expect to be removed. The portfolio is rebalanced the next day, after the market´s reaction on promotions and demotions.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only therefore it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as an investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).