Momentum in stocks can be considered as a premier anomaly in an investment world. There is hardly an anomaly more reviewed and discussed then momentum. A lot of academic papers propose various refinements to the basic momentum strategy, and we present one such paper. It suggests enhancing basic momentum strategy by conditioning on expected skewness of stocks. Focusing on negatively skewed winners and positively skewed losers can help to double the returns delivered by traditional momentum strategy approximately.

Fundamental reason
The academic paper hypothesizes that the outperformance of winners is partly driven by negative skewness, whereas the underperformance of losers in parts derives from their positive skew. If losers are on average more positively skewed than winners, then the resulting winners-losers momentum portfolio will be negatively skewed. Therefore, in the cross-section, the average long-short momentum returns increase with the difference in the level of skewness of the long and short leg of the portfolio.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks with a price higher than $5. Only stocks with a capitalization over 50% NYSE percentile are used. Maximum daily return over the past month is used as a proxy for skewness (high maximum returns are an indicator for high positive skewness, and low minimum returns indicate low skewness). Each month, investor conducts dependent 5×5 sorts of baseline skewness measure (the maximum daily return over the previous month) and formation period returns. In each month, the investor first sorts all stocks into quintiles based on expected skewness and then forms further quintiles based on their past 12-month cumulative returns (formation period of twelve months, a holding period of one month and skip one month is used as momentum specification). Then, each month, investor constructs a portfolio with the most negatively skewed winners in the long leg and the most positively skewed losers in the short leg. The portfolio is equally weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.