Firms’ growth potential is one of the main characteristics when determining the firm’s value, defined as the firm’s investment opportunities. Previous research shows that growth potential is linked with the first two moments of the stock return distribution. Furthermore, investors would rather accept lower returns for growth-oriented equities in exchange for the favorably positively skewed return distribution that these firms offer.
The novel research examines the relationship between a firm’s growth potential and the future returns of financial options contracts. The authors use the growth potential measures established in the literature (Cao, Simin, and Zhao (2008), Trigeorgis and Lambertides (2014), and Bali, Del Viva, Lambertides, and Trigeorgis (2020)) to proxy for firm-specific future-oriented growth prospects. Under a no-growth strategy, this metric indicates the share of the firm’s worth that cannot be attributable to the present value of future operating cash flows. The empirical study uses a cross-section of monthly delta-hedged equity call option returns and finds a substantial negative relationship between company growth potential and future delta-hedged call option returns. This relationship holds throughout the sample, is resilient to adjusting for a wide range of stock and option-related variables, and includes both put and delta-vega-hedged option returns. A monthly return of more than 1% is generated by a trading strategy that buys delta-hedged call options on low-growth potential equities and sell delta-hedged call options on high-growth potential companies.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the investors’ behavioral bias. Firms that have a high growth potential combined with other positive features, such as being in the tech business, are more likely to generate high returns, making them appealing to investors. However, because of the lack of information, investors are overreacting and buying call options on firms with this profile. More precisely, stock options owned by less knowledgeable investors and for which less information is accessible will be more susceptible to persistent overpricing. This is because arbitrageurs are less likely to notice and trade against the growth potential-induced option mispricing right away.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of options from OptionMetrics. Exclude options whose stocks pay a dividend within the maturity of the option and options with moneyless higher than 1.2 or lower than 0.8. Every month select near-the-money (or closest to at-the-money) call options.
The primary variable of interest is the growth options which is calculated as the percentage of a firm’s market value (V) arising from the present value of future-oriented growth opportunities (PVGO). PVGO is calculated as the (perpetual) operating cash flow of the firm (CF) divided by WACC, which is the weighted average cost of capital of the firm and subtracted by the firm’s market value. (see equation 3)
The trading strategy goes long for the delta-neutral calls on low-GO stocks and short for delta-neutral calls on high-GO stocks. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide information regarding this topic.