There are numerous systematic cross-sectional strategies. After all, a significant part of the Quantpedia’s screener consists of cross-sectional strategies such as momentum, value, carry, profitability and many others. The base of the cross-sectional strategies is some characteristic, which is used to sort assets. Utilizing this sort, one goes long top assets and shorts bottom assets. According to the novel research, independently from the characteristic (anomaly), these cross-sectional strategies can be enhanced to be more profitable and even less risky. The study identifies three fundamental performance drivers: the own-asset signal-return predictability, cross-asset signal correlation and cross-asset signal-return predictability (the implications of each predictability are further examined in the fundamental reasons). Signal-return dependencies influence the profitability of long-short strategies, and by utilizing the information obtained in the performance drivers, it is possible to improve the cross-sectional strategies.
Rather than classic sorting, for example, into deciles, the approach of the paper consists of creating all possible pairs of assets. The pair consists of one “long” asset and one “short” asset. When the whole universe is broken down into individual pairs, it is easy to estimate the influential correlations. Firstly, the correlation between the signal of the first (second) asset and subsequent return of the first (second) asset. Secondly, the correlation between the signal of the first (second) asset and the subsequent return of the second (first) asset and finally, the correlation of the two signals. Theoretically, under various assumptions, it can be shown how the performance drivers influence the resulting returns. Although the assumptions are in practice violated, the paper shows that still, the performance drivers can be used to construct a composite function or “score” such that more desirable values for each of the three drivers correspond to a higher return (and composite score). As a result, the composite score is a much stronger predictor of the performance, compared to the simple cross-sectional approach.
The approach is presented by using the momentum anomaly; however, any other anomaly could be utilized. The portfolio construction method is widely applicable to any base strategy.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, it is possible to examine the drivers (the own-asset signal-return predictability, cross-asset signal correlation and cross-asset signal-return predictability) because of the breakdown to individual pairs, where one asset is bought, and the other is shorted. Therefore, the performance of the pair consists of the return of the long position minus the return of short position.
For the first driver, the correlation between an asset’s signal and its subsequent return is crucial for the functionality. The reason is that the high correlation between signal and subsequent return is an indicator of great predictability; therefore, the indicator is informative about the performance in future: higher (lower) signal results in higher (lower) return. Secondly, the cross-asset signal correlation is the correlation of the two signals – each asset in the pair has its own signal. If the correlation is high, both returns would be high (if the signal is a positive predictor). However, the pair consists of one long and one short position. As a result, if one signal is high, other is high too, but the return difference would be small (and return as well) since both signals indicate large return. If one signal is low, another signal would also be low, and as a result, the difference would be small again (and return as well). Lastly, cross-asset signal-return predictability is the correlation between an asset’s signal and the subsequent return of the other asset. As an example, consider the correlation between the first asset´s signal and second asset´s return. When the correlation is positive, and the first asset has high own-asset signal-return predictability, the high value of the signal indicates that both returns would be large and positive and the return of the pair would be small. If the correlation is positive, but the first asset has low own-asset signal-return predictability, the difference between two assets (the return of the pair) can even be negative (unprofitable). If the correlation is around zero, there is a little connection, and the differences (returns) tend to be noisier. The favourable situation is when the correlation is negative. The return of the first asset would be high because of own-asset predictability and at the same time, the return of the second asset would be low because of negative cross-asset predictability. Therefore, the return of the pair would be relatively large.
The theoretical model is provided to show how the drivers affect the returns of pairs. However, in practice, the paper suggests a composite score based on the model that is a function of all three drivers that utilize all the correlations and predictabilities resulting in a more profitable strategy compared to the simple cross-sectional approach.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of following assets: Short-Term Bonds (Barclays US Treasury 1–3yr), US Core Bonds (Barclays US Aggregate), Global Core Bonds (Barclays Global Agg ex-US, Hedged), Long Treasury Bonds (Barclays US Treasury 10–20yr), Long Credit Bonds (Barclays US Long Credit), Emerging Markets (EM) USD Bonds (JPMorgan EMBI+, Unhedged), High Yield (Barclays Corporate High Yield), Commodities (Bloomberg Commodity Index), REITs (FTSE NAREIT ALL REITS), US Equities Small (Russell 2000), US Equities (S&P 500), Dev ex-US Equities (MSCI EAFE), and Emerging Markets (EM) Equities (MSCI EM (Emerging Markets)). Firstly, construct 78 (all) possible pair strategies available on these 13 assets; therefore, each pair strategy consists of two assets: asset 1 and asset 2. For each asset estimate each month its raw current momentum, as the (arithmetic) average of its trailing monthly returns over lookback horizon of 12 months. Secondly, each momentum signal is standardized by subtracting the mean of the signal from the raw signal and dividing the difference by the standard deviation of the signal. The mean and standard deviation are computed using the inception-to-date data.
The second part of the strategy is to construct the composite score for each pair, where the composite score consists of three components. Each component is computed using the past 120 months of data (120 is used as an example in the paper and could be changed). The first component consists of two correlations: for each pair estimate the sample correlation between the signal and its subsequent return (resulting in two correlation coefficients denoted as B11 and B22 – the correlations between asset 1 (2) signal and asset 1 (2) return). The second component consists of a correlation between the two signals – the signal for asset 1 and signal for asset 2. The third component consists of two correlations: for each pair estimate the sample correlation between an asset’s signal and the subsequent return of the other asset (denoted as B12 and B21). For example the correlation between asset 1 signal and asset 2 subsequent return. The composite score is given by the equation 8 and is equal to the sum of B11 and B22 minus the sum of B12 and B21, and the difference is scaled by the square root of the difference between one and the second component divided by pi. The relative weight on each pair strategy each month is proportional to composite score raised to the power p (p is another hyperparameter equal to the 3 in the paper) to ensure that the highest-ranked pair gets more relative weight than the others. The individual asset signals (raw momentum) determine which asset is long or short in that pair for the month. The strategy each month trades four pairs with the highest composite score and is rebalanced monthly.
Last but not least, by the construction, it is possible that the strategy would like to short corporate bonds or REITs; therefore, in the practical implementation this needs to be sorted out (for example, omitting such pairs or using the strategy as an overlay for an existing portfolio).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The strategy has a low negative beta to US equities of -0.1 (Exhibit 6)