Value effect is a well-known classical anomaly. Numerous research papers were devoted to anomaly’s analysis. Most of them conclude the value effect is remarkably strong mainly between small-cap stocks; however, large-cap stocks seem to be priced more effectively, and the anomaly is weaker between them. We link academic paper which explores options to increase value anomaly’s performance among large-cap stocks. Several simple adjustments are used for satisfactory results (earnings forecasts are used rather than book-value of equity to scale stock prices, stocks are sorted every month with timely information rather once a year with stale information, and global value breakpoints are used as opposed to regional).

Fundamental reason
Value anomaly is very well documented. The most often explanation is that investors overreact to growth aspects for growth stocks, and value stocks are, therefore, undervalued. More accurate calculation of price-to-earnings ratios for large-cap stocks helps to strengthen this effect. Market prices tend to be better aligned with earnings yields derived from forward-looking earnings based on analyst forecasts than with earnings yields based on historical earnings. Sorting stocks each month also helps to use more accurate information.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of global stocks from developed markets (North America, EU, Asia-Pacific). Global stocks are sorted into six portfolios at the end of each month, based on market capitalization and earnings yield. Firm-level earnings yields are created every month as the ratio of earnings per share to stock prices at the end of each month. Earnings per share are the average of earnings forecasts for fiscal years t, t+1 and t+2, using mean I/B/E/S forecasts as of the third Thursday of each month. Negative earnings forecasts and earnings yields above 100% per year are treated as missing. Stocks are first sorted into “big” and “small” market capitalization bins at the end of June every year based on the median NYSE market capitalization breakpoints from Ken French’s website. Within each size bin, stocks are further sorted based on their earnings yields at the end of each month. Stocks are sorted into “low” (bottom 30%), “medium” (mid 40%), and “high” (top 30%) earnings yield portfolios within each size bin. Investor goes long high earnings yield big stocks and short, low earnings yield big stocks. The portfolio is value weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Long-only value stocks logically can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities; therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high). Now, evidence for using long-short value factor portfolio as a hedge against equity market is very mixed. Firstly, there are a lot of definitions of value factor (from a simple standard P/B ratios to various more complex definition as in this strategy) and performance of different value factors differ in times of stress. But there are multiple research papers in a tone of work of Cakici and Tan: “Size, Value, and Momentum in Developed Country Equity Returns: Macroeconomic and Liquidity Exposures” that link value factor premium to liquidity and growth risk and shows that the implication is that value factor returns can be low prior to periods of low global economic growth and bad liquidity.