Weather influences the mood of the investor, which in turn influences investor’s trading behaviour and therefore also returns. Literature shows that weather influences stock returns as well as trading activity and volume. Novel research provides a direct way of assessing the economic importance of the effects of weather on the stock market by testing the profitability of global index-level trading strategies based purely on daily weather. A possible investor can construct portfolios using only ex-ante information about sky cover, temperature, wind speed, precipitation and snow depth. Aforementioned weather variables can predict daily index returns, and naturally, the predicted returns are used to construct an investing strategy. There are two possibilities: firstly, a hedge strategy that for each day takes a long position in the index of the country that has the highest predicted return and a short position in the country that has the lowest predicted return, the second strategy is the long-only strategy, which takes a long position in the country with the highest predicted returns and rebalance the position daily. Moreover, both strategies consider two types of trading regions: the “temperature-region” strategy constructs trading portfolios for each of the three temperature regions (cold, mild and hot). In contrast, the “time-zone” strategy constructs portfolios for each of the three-time zones (our focus would be centred around the long-only strategy for the cold region). Last but not least, weather-based trading strategies generate significant and gross profits during the whole backtest period.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, using a long-only strategy produces larger trading profits comparing it to the hedge strategy; moreover, the long-only strategy generates more stable profits with higher statistical significance than the hedge strategy. A key reason for such high magnitude of weather-based trading profits is that research uses the full observable weather variables to predict daily returns. If one used only one weather condition at a time to construct portfolios, trading profits would be mostly insignificant in the out-of-sample estimation. Research’s findings state that it is important to consider a comprehensive set of weather variables instead of a single condition to construct profitable strategies. Using the set including all observable weather conditions is important for capturing the full psychological effects due to weather and therefore creating a profitable strategy. Additionally, the proposed weather-based trading strategy remains profitable even after including the transaction costs. Overall, the results are consistent with the interpretation that weather affects stock returns by influencing the investor’s mood.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Global Equity Indices for cold countries of the northern hemisphere (list of the cold countries is in the paper). Weather data are from the Integrated Surface Database (ISD) managed by the National Climatic Data Center. For each country, select the weather station that is closest to the country’s main stock exchange. Missing weather data observations are complemented with data from the second-nearest weather station if the complementing weather station is within a distance of 50 kilometres from the country’s main stock exchange.

Retrieve sky cover, temperature, wind speed, precipitation and snow depth data from the ISD. To estimate the OLS coefficients, use weather variables based on the average value of hourly observations of each weather condition between 6:00 AM and 4:00 PM local time. Convert the descriptive sky cover variable (SKC) to a categorical variable by assigning a value of 0 to clear skies, a value of 2.5 to scattered cloud cover, a value of 6 to broken cloud cover and a value of 8 to completely overcast skies. Wind speed (WIND) is measured in miles per hour, and temperature (TEMP) is in Fahrenheit. RAIN is defined as an indicator variable that is equal to 1 if some liquid precipitations were recorded between 6:00 AM and 4:00 PM local time on the day of the measurement, else RAIN is equal to zero. SNOW is the five-day moving average of the mean daily snow cover in inches on the ground measured between 6:00 AM and 4:00 PM. For the months from April to November, SNOW is omitted from the regression tests.

Firstly, estimate OLS regressions of daily index returns on weather variables on a month-by-month basis for the cold region and northern hemisphere. An investor needs to estimate the following pooled regression of daily index returns of countries: [rit = βi0 + βi1SKCit + βi2WINDit + βi3RAINit + βi4SNOWit + βi5TEMPit +εit] where i indexes countries in a region-month group and t denotes trading day. All five weather variables are measured between 6:00 AM and 4:00 PM on each day. Secondly, use the OLS regression coefficients and ex-ante weather variables to predict daily returns and finally form a trading strategy. Daily predicted returns are estimated as follows:
[PRit = βi0 + βi1SKC0it + βi2WIND0it + βi3RAIN0it + βi4SNOW0it + βi5(TEMP0it + Δ it)], where PR denotes the predicted return of a country index, i indexes region-month and t indexes trading day t. Weather variables with a zero denote observed weather variables before market open. Used are the pre-market hourly weather observations measured between 5:00 and 9:00 AM local time (as the ex-ante variable). However, the OLS coefficients βi0-βi5 are estimated using weather variables measured between 6:00 AM and 4:00 PM. To align the pre-market TEMP to the OLS coefficient, adjust the 5:00 AM to 9:00 AM TEMP by adding Δit, the intra-day variation in TEMP for country i and day t. This is measured as the difference between the average temperature recorded between 6:00 AM and 4:00 PM and the average temperature recorded between 5:00 AM and 9:00 AM, using TEMP data of the preceding 20 years.

A long position is taken in the country index with the highest predicted return on day t, and the proposed strategy is rebalanced daily.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is a long-only, and as such has a strong exposition to equity market risk, therefore it can’t be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.