Multiple factors explain abnormal equity returns, which can be used to build a profitable strategy – Value, Size, or other Fama and French factors. In addition, Asness (2019) suggested a new factor – Quality, stating that the characteristics of quality stock are profitability, growth, and safety. However, this paper extends the previous work by adding two other firm characteristics that positively affect the stock’s quality – liquidity and management quality. But, undoubtedly, buying a share of a quality company is not always a good investment; on the other hand, buying a low-price share is not automatically a good investment either. Therefore, the author (Pulcini) considered not only the Quality score but also the Price score to create a new trading strategy – he calculated the Q-P score as the difference between the Quality and Price scores, telling us to go long the portfolio with the highest Q-P score and go short the portfolio with the lowest Q-P score.

Fundamental reason
As already mentioned in the Short description, the characteristics of quality stocks are profitability, growth, safety, liquidity, and management quality. Therefore, high-quality stocks tend to be profitable, stable, and growing, which are characteristics connected with outperformance across many academic studies. Additionally, managing quality and price simultaneously should eliminate stocks with low costs but bad fundamentals and overpriced good quality stocks. Finally, another reason for the functionality of this strategy is reducing the standard deviation without lowering the expected returns by diversification. According to the authors, the quality and price-based strategies are negatively correlated, which should obtain essential diversification benefits.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of non-financial firms from 25 countries. The data come from the Refiniv Eikon Datastream database.

Firstly, calculate the Quality score. The Quality sub-components are Profitability, Growth, Risk, Liquidity, and Corporate governance. The individual variables to calculate the sub-components are defined in Table 2, page 20. On 30th June of each year t, collect data of individual variables from years t-6 to t-1. To avoid outliers, eliminate the firms with values below the first and above the ninety-ninth percentile for each variable. Subsequently, rank the firms in descending order, and replace the variable’s value with the position in the ranking for each firm. Standardize the resulting ranking: calculate the z-score as z=(x-r)/σ, where x is the ranking position of the firm for a given variable, r is the average ranking of all the firms, and σ is the standard deviation of the ranking distribution. Next, calculate the sub-components Profitability, Growth, Risk, Liquidity, and Corporate governance as z-scores defined on page 14. Finally, the Quality score for the extended sample is calculated as the z-score of the sum of Profitability, Growth, Risk, and Liquidity, and the Quality score for the sample with corporate governance information is calculated as the z-score of the sum of Profitability, Growth, Risk, and Corporate governance.

Secondly, calculate the Price score. Rank the firms in descending order according to the P/B ratio, and standardize the ranking positions using the above-mentioned standardization.

Finally, determine the Q-P score as the difference between the Quality score and the Price score. Go long the first decile and short the last decile of the Q-P portfolio. The strategy is equal-weighted and rebalanced yearly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -