The rapid development of the Chinese capital markets is creating interesting questions with regards to the prediction of its stock markets. While the U.S. academic literature is rife with studies documenting the cross-section of its returns, these qualities should by extension also be found abroad. Therefore, anomalies depicting various risk premia can be constructed and used as features for a Machine Learning approach to portfolio construction. This paper replicates such dataset, identifying the usual suspects such as momentum, profitability, value or liquidity. Using a nonlinear basis approach together with the adaptive grouped Lasso framework, the authors untangle the complex relationships and determine the models using this feature selection framework. Although Lasso itself is not a novel technique, the adaptive group lasso is an improvement over the estimates of coefficients based on pre-selected groups – the basis expansions of the features – and ensuring that the estimates are asymptotically consistent two-stage estimation approach. This Big Data approach is advantageous due to the ability to perform model selection, and shrinking coefficients to zero due to the penalty imposed on the variance of the estimates. Hence, the model solves the curse of dimensionality by design, and significantly reduces the estimates’ variance, allowing the model to process more information without significantly affecting the variance of the estimates.

Fundamental reason
The economic motivation that can explain why this approach works can be described in the framework of multi-factor models. Using the Machine Learning model, a better approximation of the stochastic discount factor is obtained, and the trader can exploit this difference to bet on the mispricing of the market. From figure 3, we can see that the most often selected characteristics were typically the price momentum, earnings momentum and liquidity, which can give us an idea about the bets the model is taking. There is, however, not a uniform answer to the economic intuition behind such model selection due to the complexity of such an approach, and it is dependent on the sample. Despite the relatively high turnover, the model retains the alpha even after controlling for common risk factors, suggesting that the model creates an orthogonal signal that can be exploited. Interestingly, the average number of characteristics selected is 11, suggesting that the trading signals deemed significant by the model are quite concentrated. A further investigation of the feature selection can be found in the Appendix of the paper.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all companies in the A-Share market. The return data as well as trading and financial statement data is obtained from the CSMAR database. The feature set is constructed based on U.S. market characteristics detailed in Hou, Xue and Zhang (2020), and these anomalies used for training of the models are depicted in the Table 1 of the Appendix. Total number of features is 100 and they fall in six categories representing proxies for a particular investment anomaly defined as momentum, value, investment, profitability, intangibles and trading frictions. To form the portfolios, a rolling window estimation is adopted with the models using the past 10 years of data – 120 months. The model first selects the features by conducting the first-step estimation, penalizing the independent variables and their basis as a group. In the second stage, the model imposes a characteristic specific weight on the penalty function as described in equation 8. Both shrinkage hyperparameters gamma in the first and second stage are tuned such that the Bayesian Information Criterion is minimized for each of the iterations. The number of knots used in the basis expansion is fixed at 5 – the robustness check can be found in Table A4 of the appendix. After that, the stocks are decile-sorted based on their predicted returns and a long-short spread is formed based on the mispricing signal – the largest upside error is deemed as a strong signal. The portfolios are value-weighted and at the end of the estimation month the procedure is repeated until the whole test is conducted, forming a return series.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The backtest period is too short to be conclusive. However, based on Figure 6, the strategy does not seem to have large drawdowns.