More often than not, trading rules based on moving averages of prices predict future returns. There, indeed, is a strong bond and price drifts can be explained as a function of how much fundamentals deviate from their rolling means. The forecasting power of these deviations goes well beyond price trends, earnings momentum and number of other anomalies. In the study, a comprehensive fundamental-based measure (FDI – Fundamental Deviation Index) is used to predict stock returns in the cross-section. The FDI index is based on a deviation measure that is computed for each Compustat Unrestated quarterly accounting variable. For each stock, a deviation is defined as the difference between the most recent quarterly release and the average over the preceding three quarters, scaled by total assets. In the context of FDI, investors tend to get anchored on past fundamentals, and therefore deviate insufficiently from this anchor for forming future forecasts of fundamentals. This implies that returns are predictable from a distance between current fundamentals and their past means. It has been shown in the past that portfolios with extreme deviations from analyst-based anchors earn abnormal returns incremental to FDI. Sudden changes in accounting fundamentals from their respective moving averages (anchors) should lead to greater underreaction. Machine learning approach has proven to be a powerful tool for picking the optimal combination of deviation-based predictors of deviations of fundamentals from their preceding means. The reason is simple; there are many variables, but not all of them are significant or important for a model. This can be easily solved by a robust method that successfully identifies viable variables.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the distance between fundamentals and their preceding moving averages strongly predicts equity return. Hence, a commonly used machine learning approach (LASSO panel regression) is executed to explain the dependence by using a selection procedure that is applied to the complete set of fundamentals’ deviations from their past means. The advantage of LASSO is straightforward. In the model, it can identify needed variables while omitting variables that create noise.
Slope coefficients from the panel regression reflect sources of both time-series and cross-sectional return predictability from deviation variables. The most frequently selected variables by LASSO, are related to deviations in cash, accounts payable, capital surplus (negative weight), debt reduction, assets (negative weight), earnings per share, inventories (negative weight), and cash dividends.
Return predictability from FDI survives the exclusion of microcap stocks and is viable in the long-leg and also in recent years, as well as across various economic states reflecting high versus low investor sentiment, market volatility, cumulative market return, and aggregate liquidity. To support the results calculated by using LASSO panel regression, two commonly used ridge regression models were constructed and revealed very similar predictive abilities.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks traded on the NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq. Stocks with the end-of-month price-per-share less than 5 USD, stocks that are not traded during the month and stocks with unavailable data for the previous 12 months are excluded. Firstly, a deviation is defined as the difference between the most recent quarterly release and the average over the preceding three quarters, scaled by total assets. For each stock, the Fundamental Deviation Index (FDI) is computed as the fitted value of LASSO panel regression using the current months’ realizations of deviation variables (deviations in 93 Compustat Unrestated accounting variables). It assignes weights to deviation variables based on their predicting strength. Each deviation gets a percentile value relative to all stocks’ deviations in the previous month. Long the top FDI decile and short the bottom FDI decile. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide any information about the usage of the strategy as a hedge.