Although intangible assets are difficult to measure and include many different types such as patents, good will and organization capital, where all of them could have distinct implications for asset pricing, they are as the research suggests, crucial to a firm’s productivity growth and competitiveness. Therefore, the stock price is largely influenced by the intangible assets in a similar way as the tangible ones. Among these assets, patents have become a crucial component of a firm’s market value in the knowledge-based economy. Yet, there is not enough research about this important component of intangible assets.

Novel research has developed a new measure connected to the patents – the patent-to-market ratio. This ratio captures a firm’s market value that is attributable to the market value of its patent stock. The ratio is based on the estimation of the market value of a firm’s new granted patents by relying on the stock market reaction around patent granted dates to estimate the market value of patents. Nextly, it is needed to measure a firm’s cumulative market value of patents by adding the market value of new patents to the depreciated market value of its existing patents. This cumulative market value divided by the market value of the firm results in the patent-to-market ratio (PTM). PTM ratio captures a firm’s market value that is attributable to its patents. Additionally, the PTM ratio is measured purely using historical stock price information, which avoids looking ahead bias associated with citation base measures that rely on patent’s future citation information. As the research shows, PTM can be utilized in a profitable trading strategy. As common sense suggests, firms with a large amount of patents should have superior performance. This research confirms this hypothesis and proves that strategy based on PTM consisting of going long stocks with PTM ratio and on the other hand, shorting stocks with low PTM ratio is both economically, and statistically significant.

Fundamental reason
Intangible assets such as patents have become crucially important. Academics agree that intangible assets should be considered as long-term assets that are key to the firm’s growth and productivity. Naturally, better productivity and growth is connected with a better performance of the firm. Although there is a general consent, the measurement of intangible assets is hard to do. Therefore only a little research has been done on this topic. Interestingly, the patent-to-market ratio (PTM) is a simple way how to capture a firm’s market value that is attributable to the market value of its patent stock. Moreover, the importance of the patents in the asset pricing is also vivid from the fact that the average PTM ratio has increased from 6.91% in 1965 to 13.59% in 2010, showing that patents have become an increasingly valuable component of a firm’s market value. As the authors state, the market value of patents provides a direct measure of the private value of inventions.
In contrast, the commonly used patent citation measure captures both the private and social values of inventions. Additionally, the PTM ratio is based purely on historical stock price information, so this approach avoids looking ahead bias associated with citation base measures that rely on patents’ future citation information. Last but not least, the PTM ratio is measured with monetary value and normalized by a firm’s market value, that creates a measure that is easily comparable across firms.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks with non-missing accounting and returns data. Financial firms (SIC between 6000 and 6999), closed-end funds, trusts, ADRs, REITs, units of beneficial interest and firms with a negative book value of equity are excluded. The sample includes only firms after they have been granted at least one patent.

Firstly, estimate the market value (MT) of a firm’s new granted patents by relying on the stock market reaction around patent granted dates to estimate the market value of patents, following the approach by Kogan et al. (2017) – market value (MT) of a firm’s newly granted patent is equal to change in market capitalization (in excess of normal market move) during first two days after the patent is granted.

Secondly, recursively compute the firm’s cumulative market value of patents CMPi,t for firm i in year t (equations at the end of page 10, including also the computation of the first term at t=0). The Patent-to-Market (PTM) ratio for firm i at time t is simply equal to the CMP divided by the firm’s market value (MV). Finally, stocks are sorted according to their PTM ratios into decile portfolios. Long the highest decile and short the lowest decile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced yearly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Based on the source research paper (see table 6), the strategy has a strongly positive correlation against equity index therefore probably can’t be used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.