Pairs trading is a well-known trading strategy performed mainly in lower time intervals (several days to several weeks). However, lower timeframes slowly start to lose their edge as more and more hedge funds, and traders move into this space. The logical step is, therefore, to move to the higher trading frequency – a move to intraday trades. We present an academic research paper we believe is worth reading as it explores hourly trading frequency, and it performs an important sensitivity analysis of transaction costs and speed of execution.

Fundamental reason
As prices in pairs of stocks were closely co-integrated in the past, there is a high probability that those two securities share common sources for fundamental return correlations. A temporary shock could move one stock out of the common price band, which presents a statistical arbitrage opportunity. The universe of pairs is continuously updated, which ensures that pairs which no longer move in synchronicity are removed from trading, and only pairs with a high probability of convergence remain.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of FTSE100 stocks. Trading is performed on an hourly basis. Trading time is divided into periods. Each period begins 22 hours after the start of the previous period and is divided into a 264-hour formation period and a 132-hour trading period. The formation period is used to identify pairs of stocks which move together, with the actual transactions occurring in the trading period. To identify pairs of stocks which move together, the investor ranks every pair based on the sum of squared deviations of the normalized price series estimated in the formation period. The top 5 pairs from the formation period are selected for the trading period. In the trading period, pairs are opened when the normalized prices diverge by more than two times the historical standard deviation metric. Pairs are opened by going long on the lower normalized priced security and short on the higher normalized priced security. Pairs are closed when the normalized price series converge, or at the end of the trading period.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Pairs trading on the intraday basis is related to other arbitrage/reversal strategies – it is also a type of “liquidity providing” strategy and as such it usually benefits from increased volatility or a drop in liquidity and performs well during market crises. However, source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, rigorous backtest is recommended …