Investors and traders typically use the Relative Strength Index (RSI) to find signals that help identify turning points in security prices. This approach, however, discounts the true nature of the indicator and limits its potential. A breakdown of the RSI formula reveals that its power lies in its ability to identify consistent uptrends with strong momentum. Some practitioners use RSI ranges to identify existing trends and RSI extremes to signal momentum shifts. However, these approaches do not quantify how long RSI should hold its range, how regularly RSI should reach a momentum milestone, and, most importantly, if RSI range and momentum indications have predictive value. RSI range alone is inadequate because it does not always capture upside momentum. The RSI range measures trend consistency well, but a momentum component is needed to uncover the strongest uptrends, and combining an RSI bull range with RSI momentum can foreshadow sizable advances with good success rates. As such, these signals can be part of a successful combined trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
The Relative Strength Index (RSI) is a momentum oscillator that is widely used to identify turning points or reversals in security prices. These reversal strategies, however, run counter to the concepts behind momentum and trend-following strategies. While it is possible to time reversals using RSI, reversal strategies do not fully utilize RSI’s inherent strengths. Despite its label as a momentum oscillator, RSI is a natural trend indicator. RSI is bound between 0 and 100, with 50 as the mid-point. A stock’s price moves higher when RSI remains largely above 50 and lower when the oscillator remains largely below 50. The further above 50, the stronger the uptrend. The further below 50, the stronger the downtrend. The zone around 50 defines the battle for trend consistency. For an uptrend to be truly consistent, pullbacks should be limited, and the trend should stay in motion. This is where the RSI range comes into play, especially the lower end of the range. With the midpoint at 50, declines are considered normal pullbacks within a larger uptrend as long as RSI holds above 40. A price decline that pushes RSI below 40 indicates that the uptrend is losing consistency. Thus, RSI can be a good fit for trend-following strategies.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks from the S&P 500. “N” is set to be 25 days. Firstly, we use 14 – day RSI to assess if stocks are in a bull range (RSI fluctuates between 40 and 100 over 25 days). Then we use the momentum signal – we check the highest high value of 14 – day RSI. It has to be greater than 70 over 25 days to select stocks into the trading portfolio. Stocks are weighted equally, and the portfolio is rebalanced on a daily basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only therefore it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as the most of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).