Herd behaviour in equity markets is nothing new, and this type of behaviour can be simply explained as the tendency of individuals to follow the trend. However, the research identifies two distinct impacts on markets of such behaviour. Firstly, the mutual imitation among investors may temporarily drive asset prices away from fundamental values and move the market toward inefficiency. On the other hand, uninformed traders can become informed by imitating the observed movement in the market and in that way, herd behaviour in investors may help impound information about fundamentals into asset prices, what would enhance market efficiency. This paper examines the ability of herding to enhance the industry momentum strategy. The idea is based on the finding that high herding in industries is helping to impound information about fundamentals and making the market more efficient. Logically, considering the aforementioned, the high herding would weaken the momentum strategy. That leads to a profitable and as research also proves statistically significant trading strategy consisting of industry momentum strategy (going long winners and shorting losers), but with an added filter that filters industries according to their herding levels. To sum it up, a low level of herding significantly enhances stock price momentum.

Fundamental reason
The functionality of industry momentum strategies, or momentum strategies in general, can be simply explained as the tendency of assets that have performed well in the past to perform well in the near future and on the other hand, the tendency of stocks that have performed badly to perform badly soon. The reason for the functionality of this strategy is simple; high herding is helping to impound information about fundamentals and making the market more efficient what weakens the momentum anomaly. This leads to an opportunity for a potential investor to enhance his momentum profits by identifying industries with low herding and picking only sectors with low levels of herding.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 49 Fama and French industries; therefore, stocks are firstly sorted into industry portfolios (portfolios can be easily bought by ETFs). Nextly, for a herding measure, estimate the cross­sectional standard deviation (CSSD) of single stock returns with respect to industry mean returns (equation 1, page 2). After that, the CSSD is normalized by subtracting the mean of industry and dividing it by the standard deviation of CSSD (herding level is calculated using the previous 1­month returns). Based on normalized CSSD score, the top 30% of industries are identified as a low level of herding.

The momentum is calculated as the past six ­month returns (the 7­ to 1­month returns, one month is skipped) in each industry as a proxy for winners and losers. From the low level of herding, long the top 50% momentum industries and short the bottom 50% of industries. The strategy is rebalanced monthly, and the portfolio is equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on the source research paper (see Exhibit 5), the strategy has a strongly positive performance during economic crisis states therefore probably can be used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets.