In the past, the shipping industry has not been open for a wider circle of investors; however, this has changed over time, and various investors can now buy stocks of shipping companies. Moreover, the increasing number of companies in the market offers investors an alternative way to invest in the shipping industry. Existing literature states that freight rates are the predominant factor which affects the performance of shipping companies. Naturally, it can be expected that these tanker shipping companies should exhibit a common long-run path with the Baltic Tanker Index. The aforementioned has led the authors to propose a trading strategy for a portfolio of tanker shipping companies that are listed in the US stock markets. The tested cointegrated relationship leads to a long-short trading strategy based on a cointegration model and a simple moving average rule. This trading strategy outperforms the classic buy-and-hold approach across various investment horizons, often by a wide margin. However, in our honest opinion, the strategy would perform much better as a long-only because a lot of whipsaws accompanies the long-short variant. Last but not least, although the strategy probably deserves a deeper look into (particularly when both volatility and maximal drawdown is not stated), in our opinion, the main idea of the strategy is interesting and therefore we are adding it to our screener with a recommendation to use an idea but modify the strategy.

Fundamental reason
If we would compare shipping stocks with stocks from other sectors, shipping stocks exhibit some unique characteristics, mostly due to the globalized nature of the sector’s operations. Previous research has found that market betas are of little importance for shipping stocks, and country-specific risk is not essential for shipping stocks investor. However, global risk factors play an important role if we are considering the shipping companies. Past research has successfully shown that the most important factor that can explain or even predict shipping stock performance is the freight rate (represented by the Baltic Tanker Index). Intuitively, it is clear that from a financial accounting perspective, freight rates will largely determine the amount of income received by any given shipping company. Nextly, according to the research, portfolio’s returns and the Baltic Tanker Index will move together in the long-run and share a cointegrating relationship. Therefore, a trading strategy that is derived from the close association between tanker market freight rates and the stock returns of tanker companies should be profitable. Results show that a proposed strategy in the paper that uses the cointegrating relationship and a simple moving average rule appears to be successful, compared to a simple buy-and-hold strategy. Last but not least, although the idea is interesting, as we have previously mentioned, this strategy should be taken with caution.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks of firms whose fleet consists of tankers more than 66% (DHT Holding, Teekay, Tsakos Energy Nav and Capital Product Partners). Nextly, consider a variable BT(t) that is the natural logarithm of the Baltic Tanker Index at time t, and two moving averages are employed: a six-week (long-term) moving average MA(6) and the lag of the relationship (short-term) denoted as MA(1). When the short-term moving average exceeds the long-term moving average, it is considered as a buy signal, because it suggests that prices are moving higher at a faster rate than in the past. On the other hand, when the short-term moving average passes below the long-term moving average, it is considered as a sell signal. In-between the crossovers, strategy dictates that investor continues to be in the market (for example, after a buy signal the algorithm buys and holds until a sell signal is found).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk. The selected strategy is a class of “Market Timing” strategies which tries to hold equities only in positive times and short them otherwise; therefore this logic can be maybe used to create amended market timing strategy (using original rules) which is out of shipping stocks during positive times and holds bonds (or goes short equities) during bad times. This new amended strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. However, performance/risk characteristics and overall correlation and quality of suggested amended strategy can be found out only by rigorous backtest and source academic research paper doesn’t give us any clues on how it will perform…