In his paper, Klein (2011) described a simple equity index trading strategy that uses signals from the credit market. The strategy was built on the assumption that credit portfolio managers adjust their portfolios with greater foresight than equity managers due to liquidity constraints. Simply, it posits a profitable relationship between a credit index and an equity index that helps avoid being long the equity market on extreme down days. This paper looks back at the original credit-informed trading strategy and extends it to address some of the weaknesses identified in the original paper. The main challenge the original strategy faced was its flat performance in periods when equities exhibited superior returns. In particular, the relationship between a credit market and equity market indicated that equities are overvalued about 60% of the time, resulting in a low equity participation rate. To address the high level of strategy pessimism, the author introduces an equity premium rate, so equities will have a greater chance of appearing undervalued. After applying the premium rate to the equity index, equity participation increased substantially. The enhanced version of the original strategy goes long stocks at a leverage rate of 120% if stocks appear undervalued relative to corporate bonds and shorts stocks at a leverage rate of 20% if stocks look overvalued. Remarkably, after applying the leverage, the strategy exhibits volatility comparable to that of the S&P 500 while delivering twice the return.

Fundamental reason
Credit analysts claim that “credit anticipates and equity confirms.” In other words, the credit market prices anticipate trends before the stock market does. While anticipation does not always lead to confirmation, confirmation is provided often enough so that investors can utilize the debt-equity relationship in their asset allocation decisions. Specifically, they can use a bond index and equity index to determine whether equities are overpriced or underpriced relative to bonds and adjust their asset allocation accordingly.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the SPY ETF and the S&P 500 e-mini futures. First, convert the option-adjusted spread version of the ICE BofA Single-B US High Yield Index (HY/B) into default probabilities. The index data can be obtained from https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/BAMLH0A2HYB. Compute the hazard rate as λ = (OAS / 10000) * [1 / (1 – RR)], where the OAS is the HY/B option-adjusted spread expressed in basis points, and RR is the recovery rate assumption. Next, calculate the default probability as default probability = 1 – exp(-Tλ), where T is a time to maturity assumption (T = 5 years). A detailed explanation of how to convert the OAS into default probabilities can be found in Appendix 1. Second, apply the equity premium rate to the S&P 500 index values as Î(t) = I(t) * exp(r(T-t)), where I(t) is an S&P 500 index level at time t, r is an annual premium rate, and T is the time at which a fair value decision is being made. To find an optimal r, perform a coarse grid search over possible premium rates and choose the one that results in the best strategy performance over the latest 10-year time period. Third, run a simple OLS regression each day by regressing the log of the S&P 500 index value after applying the premium rate (dependant variable) on the default probability (independent variable) using the daily data over the latest 3 months. The trading rule for the strategy is as follows: invest 100% of assets in the SPY ETF. If the current S&P 500 index value is below the estimated OLS regression line, the S&P 500 appears to be undervalued and therefore allocate an additional 20% to the S&P 500 e-mini futures at the open of the following trading day to obtain 120% long exposure. If the current S&P 500 index value is above the estimated OLS regression line, the S&P 500 appears to be overvalued and therefore go 120% short on the S&P 500 e-mini futures at the open of the following trading day to offset the 100% S&P 500 long exposure and obtain 20% short exposure. Calculate the new leverage rates every day.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - In theory, the premium could go negative after a long period of equity drawdowns, but that transition would take months.

From backtest, however, we see it is not performing well.