Thanks to relatively high return, the equities represent a prevalent asset class, in which the majority of investors allocates a substantial part of their capital. However, the higher reward comes with a higher risk of facing significant stock market drawdowns. Therefore, hedging strategies that have the ability to protect the portfolio’s value during market sell-offs are highly valuable.
Various possibilities of how to hedge the equity portfolios against the risk of large market drawdowns have been examined in the research paper from Mark Cook et al. (2017). In their paper, the authors have examined the performance of classic passive hedging strategies as buying and rolling one-month, at-the-money S&P 500 put options or going long on credit protection (short credit risk). As these strategies proved to be too costly or not efficient enough, the authors further propose a new set of hedging strategies based on various stock quality measures that determine the positions in stocks. Therefore, the paper studies the emerging quality investment style. Together, the authors evaluate the performance of 18 different factors and their further combinations, resulting in an interesting deep dive into quality investing. This is particularly interesting since there does not seem to be consent how the quality factors should be constructed compared to the other well-known factors such as Value, Size or other Fama French factors. The most advanced presented long/short trading strategy, which combines all quality factors and three different weighting methods, has earned an annual return of 12,2% when scaled to 10% volatility.

Fundamental reason
The functionality of the quality strategy is very intuitive. The quality investment style longs fundamentally strong stocks while shorting fundamentally weak stocks. The criteria often involve profitability, safety (volatility), growth and payout metrics. Therefore, high-quality stocks tend to be stable, profitable and with considerable growth. These characteristics are connected with outperformance across many academic studies, particularly during a market downturn when there is a “flight to quality”. During the stock market crisis, the high-quality stocks with safe balance sheets should experience a smaller drawdown as they serve as crisis hedge for investors.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stock listed on NYSE, NASDAQ and AMEX. For each stock in the investment universe, calculate a raw signal value of a particular quality factor (defined in Table 6, page 15). Then, rank the universe based on raw signal values and for each stock calculate a z-score as z=(r – μr)/ σr, where r is stock´s rank, μr is the mean of ranks and σr is the standard deviation of ranks.
For each stock, compute the z-score for each of the 18 raw signals defined in Table 6. Then, make a simple average of these 18 z-scores for each stock and rank the universe based on these averages. Then compute the final Z-score for each stock based on this rank.
Further, paper suggests three portfolio construction methods. The first portfolio is created as beta neutral to the S&P 500 using five-day overlapping returns over the past three years (defined in equation 5, page 15). The second portfolio is created as sector-neutral. When computing the z-scores for a particular stock, take the mean rank of stocks within its sector. Then weight the portfolio by such calculated z-scores.For the third portfolio, scale the stock´s z-score by its volatility, which is estimated as the rolling 50-day standard deviation of daily returns. The presented composite strategy combines all three portfolio approaches (in the paper, performance metrics are available for each construction method). The portfolio is scaled to 10% volatility based on its past performance. Strategy is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The authors suggest (and design) to use this strategy as a hedge in crisis. The performance in the crisis periods is even better as during “normal” times (Table 8).