Academic research shows that informed traders choose to trade first in the options market. Therefore, some information about future stock movements could be derived from options. One such indicator is skewness (volatility smirk), which is the difference between the implied volatilities of out-of-the-money put options and the implied volatilities of at-the-money call options. Going long on stocks with the smallest skewness and long on stocks with the highest skewness delivers statistically and economically significant returns. Research shows that this anomaly is related to earnings surprises, as stocks with the highest skewness have disappointing future earnings. This cross-sectional predictability is robust to various controls and is persistent for at least six months.

Fundamental reason
Investors’ aversion toward negative jumps is the driving force for the volatility smirks. Another explanation is that informed traders who might have an information advantage might lead to higher demand for particular option contracts. This, in turn, affects the expensiveness of options, measured by option implied volatility, and possibly predicts future stock returns. If there are more investors willing to long the put than those willing to short the put, both the price and the implied volatility of the put would increase, reflecting a higher demand, and this leads to a steeper volatility skew. In general, high buying pressure for puts and steep volatility skew are associated with bad news about future stock prices.

Simple trading strategy
Stocks with liquid options are used as the investment universe. Skewness is calculated as the difference between the implied volatilities of OTM puts and ATM calls. A put option is defined as OTM when the ratio of strike price to the stock price is closest to 0.95 (but lower than 0.95), and a call option is defined as ATM when the ratio of strike price to the stock price is closest to 1. Only options with a time to expiration between 10 and 60 days are included. Weekly SKEW is calculated by averaging the daily SKEW over a week.

Every week the investors sort all sample firms into quintile portfolios based on the previous week’s average skew (Tuesday close to Tuesday close). Portfolio 1 includes firms with the lowest skew, and portfolio 5 includes firms with the highest skew. He/she then goes long on portfolio one and short on portfolio 5 (value-weighted portfolios) and rebalances the portfolios weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.