To help us understand the financial markets, several financial models that have assumptions such as no-arbitrage conditions or rationality emerged. However, the assumptions frequently do not hold, and as a result, there are several anomalies. One of these assumptions is that stocks and corporate bonds of the same firm should be consistently priced in a model without arbitrage.
Novel research has identified that this theory does not hold in practice resulting in a valuation gap across these two markets. The data suggests mispricing across equity and bond markets which can be measured as the debt-equity spread. The debt-equity spread can be calculated as the difference between the actual and equity-implied credit spreads. Although the calculation of the implied credit spread (based on the CreditGrades model) is complex, the spread captures the mispricing between bonds and equities and points to the relative “cheapness” of bonds/equities. The mispricing can be utilized in a strategy that sorts either bonds or equities based on their relative value implied by the debt-equity spread. This screener’s addition is related to the equities, where the debt-equity spread is a negative predictor because the equity is valued relatively high compared to the debt. As a result, stocks with the highest spread underperform the stocks with the lowest spread.

Fundamental reason
The fundamental reason is that the debt-equity spread identifies the mispricing of bonds and equities by identifying the valuation gap. According to the authors, if the equity valuation is relatively high compared to the debt, equity-implied credit spread is low relative to the actual credit spread, and the debt-equity spread is high. On the other hand, if the firm´s equity is valued low compared to the debt, the debt-equity spread is also low. Therefore, the high debt-equity spread of the firm points to an overvalued equity (relative to the bonds) and undervalued bonds (relative to equity). The exact opposite holds for the low debt-equity spread. As a result, the debt-equity spread identifies mispricing in bonds and equities and could be utilized in a strategy.
Additionally, the results are robust to several standard factors, firm and security characteristics, and overall, it cannot be said that the common risk-based characteristics drive the anomaly. Moreover, it seems that mispricing is persistent as both corporations and insiders tend to be aware of it and arbitrage against it. For example, high debt-equity spread firms with expensive equity and cheap debt issue more equity and retire more debt to exploit the mispricing. Authors have also identified that the executives are more likely to sell the stocks in the subsequent month in firms with the high debt-equity spread compared to the low debt-equity spread.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. Stocks in the financial industry are excluded. Stock data is obtained from CRSP and accounting data from Compustat. Bond return data are obtained from Lehman Brothers Fixed Income Database, NAIC, and WRDS. The zero-coupon yield curve is from FRED. The first step is the calculation of the debt-equity spread, which is defined as the actual credit spread and equity-implied credit spread. For the calculation of the equity-implied credit spread, one needs to calculate the theoretical bond price given by equation 11 (section 2.1 is the theoretical background behind the bond price calculation and section 2.2 discusses the practical implementation). Overall, the theoretical computation is complex, and both sections 2.1 and 2.2 are necessary to understand the underlying theory. If the implied price is calculated, the implied credit spread is calculated as the difference between the implied bond yield and the yield of a hypothetical Treasury security that has matched cash flows. Each month, sort stocks based on their firm´s debt-equity spread into quintiles. Long the bottom quintile and short the highest quintile. The strategy is rebalanced monthly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Figure 3 indicates that the strategy tends to suffer during recessions.