Post-earnings announcement drift is a well-known effect which appears among equities. Most of the strategies, which are built around PEAD, work with an earnings surprise to define which stocks are the most prone to drift. Recent academic research offers a different recipe; it expects that stock’s price movements incorporate earnings surprise. Therefore it proposes to use only price data and compare stock’s movement during an earnings announcement date to the historical distribution of moves. This methodology allows building a trading strategy without a need for additional databases (earnings data and analysts expectations data).

Fundamental reason
Academic research suggests two main reasons for the strategy’s functionality. Delayed action of hedge funds whose delay of reaction often depends on the Board convocation. These people are usually huge investors with huge flows, and these flows may significantly impact the market. The second reason is delayed action of equity analysts, who are market movers on many stocks, especially for bulge-brackets banks, even if their efficiency still has to be scientifically proven. They are well-known to be laggards. This lag can be explained by the fact that, after a publication with a deep impact on the stock price, analysts have to re-examine their model, the investment case, and then rewrite a note. This process takes time, meaning that the impact will not occur immediately.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NASDAQ 100 stocks. Each day investor checks if any stock has earnings announcement management call. He compares daily open to close move (adjusted by index move) during announcement day to a 60-day history of moves for that stock. Position (long or short) is open in case the relative movement of the stock (positive or negative) exceeds five times its 60d daily realized volatility. The position is held for 40 days, and its weight is 2% for each stock.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.