This paper studies the basis, which is the futures price minus the synthetic fair-value futures price, which is implied by both spot market price and borrowing rate. The basis is often recognized as a reflection of the difference between the benchmark borrowing rate and interest rates that arbitrageurs can utilize to finance their spot market positions. According to the theory, in equilibrium, the basis is implied by the supply-side frictions of dealers, for example, balance sheet costs or the actual demand of futures to be intermediated. If the demand exceeds the supply which can be provided at current rates, intermediaries raise the borrowing rates embedded in futures contracts.
Using a theoretical model and empirical evidence, this novel research studies the cross-sectional and time-series effects of bases for international equity indexes futures. According to the paper, futures-spot bases in global equity markets reflect liquidity demand for equity index exposure that is common to both futures markets and spot markets. Moreover, such liquidity demand generates predictions for the relationship between bases and futures and spot prices. As we have previously mentioned, the paper examines both the cross-sectional and time-series effect, but we centre our attention around the cross-sectional effects.
Bases are linked with returns predictability and can capture returns associated with liquidity provision for common equity index exposure. The effect can be utilized in a trading strategy, that takes long positions in equity indices with more negative bases (cheaper) and short equity indices with more positive bases (more expensive). Furthermore, futures demand, which is captured by the basis, is also connected with the liquidity demand for indexes in the underlying spot market, but the results for futures are stronger.

Fundamental reason
The paper explores mainly the one-week period and has found that there is a negative and significant relationship between the basis and the subsequent week’s futures and spot returns. According to the research, this result is consistent with the liquidity demand-based explanation for the futures-spot basis. The prediction is that the basis predicts futures market returns and spot market returns with the same sign. On the other hand, the convergence-based explanations of the basis agree with negative predictions for the futures returns, but according to these predictions, spot returns should have a positive relationship, or they should be unrelated. However, the paper has found the opposite and the strategy can also be implemented in the spot market. Furthermore, a negative and significant relationship is more persistent than just one-week. Therefore the rebalancing period can be longer compared to other liquidity demand futures strategies.
The trading strategy can be labelled as the Liquidity Demand trading strategy that has a simple logic. Take a long position in equity indices where futures are cheap relative to spot market prices and take a short position in equity indices where futures are expensive relative to the spot market. The “cheapness” can be measured by the basis.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of futures for developed market equity indices: S&P 500, NASDAQ, Russell 2000, S&P 400 MidCap, Dow Jones Industrial Average, S&P TSE 60, FTSE 100, EUROSTOXX, CAC40, DAX, IBEX, FTSE MIB, AEX, Hangseng, Topix, OMXS30, SMI and ASX SPI 200. Firstly, the basis is computed as the difference between the futures price and the fair value futures price divided by the spot price, which is multiplied by the time to maturity. The fair value futures price at time t is computed as the difference between the spot price multiplied by one plus benchmark risk-free rate and expected dividends in period t + 1 (point-in-time forecasts of index dividends provided by Goldman Sachs are used as a measure of dividend expectations). Paper computes minute-by-minute futures prices by taking the midpoint from the last bid and ask quotes. Basis at a given day is equal to the average value of the minute-by-minute observations to reduce estimation error and to control for asynchronous closing prices. Take a long position in equity indices where futures are cheap relative to spot market prices (low basis) and take a short position in equity indices where futures are expensive relative to spot market (high basis). At time t, the weight of each futures contract is determined as the difference between the rank of the one-day lagged basis value and number of traded futures minus one divided by two. Positions (weights) at time t are multiplied by a constant to ensure that the sum of the long (short) positions equals to 1 (-1). For the exact mathematical denotation, the weighting is given by equation 18 in the paper. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide any information about hedging properties.