Earnings of publicly traded firms is a pivotal topic among practitioners and academics as well. Earnings announcements, earnings calls, and the comparison of the analysts’ forecasted values and the reported values are greatly anticipated among the public. Therefore, it is no surprise that these events provide novel information, and prices tend to react to the news quickly.
It is safe to say, that the earnings announcements are well-researched since the academics have identified many anomalies or effect connected with earnings such as post-earnings announcement drift. Still, earnings provide plenty of new information which could be utilized, if it is correctly interpreted. However, the numerous variables and possible non-linear dependencies with the subsequent return can be detrimental for exploiting the new set of information.
This novel research suggests using a machine learning algorithm to predict the subsequent abnormal return after the earnings announcements (and calls). The proposed algorithm is the random forests, commonly used in the financial practice since it can solve problems of overfitting, can learn the non-linear dependencies and does not require substantial hyper-parameter tuning. The algorithm utilizes common stock valuation ratios, forecast errors that measure unexpected deviations of forecasted and reported accounting information, uncertainty and information quality (e.g. dispersion of analyst forecasts) and textual sentiment polarity that extracts the sentiment from earnings conference call using the positivity and negativity word dictionary of Loughran and McDonald (2011).
Overall, the strategy is largely profitable even after the inclusion of conservative transaction costs and is an excellent example of the applicable machine learning methods in the stock market.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the probably most important aspects of the machine learning algorithms are the features used for learning/predicting. The strategy uses common stock valuation ratios, forecast errors, uncertainty and information quality and textual sentiments. The academic research already studied almost every variable used for the prediction, and the paper provides references for each feature. Therefore, the inputs are well-known and are recognized to be “working”.
Secondly, each machine learning-based strategy’s functionality needs to be attributed to the algorithm itself. Even if the simple linear regression had all the data as the random forests, the result would not be the same, which is supported by almost every research that compares the machine learning methods with classical methods. The random forests are not prone to overfitting and can learn the non-linear dependencies. Additionally, the random forests cannot be considered as black-boxes. Through importance plots, we can examine the importance of the features and see their relevance, making the strategy more transparent.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P 1500 constituents. The analyst estimate data are obtained from the Institutional Brokers Estimate System (I/B/E/S) database of Thomson Reuters, the price data are obtained from the Thomson Reuters Eikon and earnings call transcript data are obtained from the Seeking Alpha and Thomson Reuters Eikon.
The variable which the algorithm aims to predict is the five trading days abnormal return following the earnings call. The abnormal return is defined as the raw return (using the open price at the day after call and close price five trading days after) minus the expected return over the same period (paper utilizes the methodology of Battalio and Mendenhall (2011); see the equation 3, page 10). The input variables include 54 features including common stock valuation ratios, forecast errors that measure unexpected deviations of forecasted and reported accounting information, uncertainty and information quality (e.g. dispersion of analyst forecasts) and textual sentiment polarity that extracts the sentiment from earnings conference call using the positivity and negativity word dictionary of Loughran and McDonald (2011). All the features with their corresponding definitions are listed in Table 3.
Using the features mentioned above, the abnormal return is predicted using random forests. Therefore, the prediction is the average of the single trees. The paper utilizes 5000 trees with a maximum tree depth of 20.
For each prediction of the stock´s return, compute a rolling percentage rank by comparing the prediction to 1500 (other) preceding predictions (the previous predictions can be from the same or the previous quarter). Nextly, the stocks are sorted into deciles based on their rank. Long the top decile and short the bottom decile. The strategy is rebalanced daily (overlapping portfolios) with a holding period of 5 days and equally-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The backtest period is not long enough to be sure. It does not include both the great financial crisis and the covid crisis as major stressful events. The sample period includes only one significant stressful market conditions (2018). However, based on figure 11 and drawdown (Table 8, Panel B), the performance seems stable.