Momentum is the speed or velocity of price changes in stock, security, or tradable instrument. Momentum shows the rate of change in price movement over some time to help investors determine the strength of a trend. In other words, we can say that momentum is a tendency of stocks that have performed relatively well in the past continue to outperform in the intermediate horizon. The strong performance of the momentum-based trading strategies persists over time and prevails across different markets. Despite that momentum seems to be present everywhere, there are notable exceptions such as China and other East Asian stock markets.

In this paper, the potential explanations for the insignificant momentum phenomenon in the Chinese stock market are analyzed by decomposing the asset returns into the intraday and overnight return components. The authors follow the Lou, Polk, and Skouras (2019) approach to decompose the monthly asset returns into the daytime (i.e., open-to-close) and the overnight (i.e., close-to-open) components. Furthermore, the study shows that stocks that are past intraday (overnight) winners persistently outperform those that are past intraday (overnight) losers in the subsequent intraday (overnight) periods. However, the same intraday- (overnight-) momentum strategy suffers dramatically in the subsequent overnight (intraday) periods. In general, past intraday (overnight) winners tend to be more (less) speculative stocks which are highly demanded during the day (night). All-inclusive, the results are consistent with investor heterogeneity, and this persistent tug of war virtually eliminates the effectiveness of investors pursuing the momentum-based trading strategy in China.

Stocks that are past intraday (overnight) winners persistently outperform those that are past intraday (overnight) losers in the subsequent intraday (overnight) periods. However, the same intraday- (overnight-) momentum strategy suffers dramatically in the subsequent overnight (intraday) periods. Therefore, there are many options how to exploit these findings, we present just one possible variant (intraday momentum), and others (overnight momentum, intraday and overnight reversals) can be found in the paper.

Fundamental reason
Chinese stock market differs from usual stock markets by several key institutional differences. Furthermore, those several differences are a very strong and important basis for the claim of investor heterogeneity. To begin with, the opening price in China’s market is determined by a 10-minute pre-open call auction. More in-depth, the trading mechanism in the pre-open auction facilitates price discovery, because traders need to incorporate new information released after the market close in the prior day in setting their orders. Consequently, investors trading during the pre-open call auction period are likely to be early-informed, and those trading before the market close are later-informed. Second, individual investors contribute to more than 80% of the total trading volume in the Chinese A-share market, while trading is more institutional-based in the US.

To verify the investor heterogeneity claim and its possible impact on the day and night returns in the cross-section, a comprehensive examination of the momentum-type strategies in China has been provided.
Consequently, it is observed that the conventional momentum strategy performs poorly overall in China, as well as intraday return and overnight return are strongly negatively correlated at the monthly frequency. It indicates that stocks that experience high price increases during the day (i.e., open-to-close) tend to experience dramatic price reversal over the night (i.e., close-to-open), and vice versa. The paper showed us strong evidence that stocks that are past intraday (overnight) winners persistently outperform those that are past intraday (overnight) losers in the subsequent intraday (overnight) periods. However, the same intraday- (overnight-) momentum strategy suffers dramatically in the subsequent overnight (intraday) periods. This tug of war effect virtually eliminates the effectiveness of investors pursuing the momentum-based trading strategy and could be the reason for the overall poor conventional momentum performance in China.

Finally, consistent with the investor heterogeneity claim, stocks with a large upward trend during the day tend to be relatively small, growth, and high turnover firms with high idiosyncratic risk, less analyst coverage, and relatively high institutional ownership. Is discovered that the tug of war is highly persistent in China, and the intraday (overnight) return persistence at the firm-level is robust after accounting for a number of well-known return predictors in the cross-section.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese stocks from the China Stock Market & Accounting Research (CSMAR) Database. Firstly, compute intraday returns as close minus open divided by the open price. Secondly, for all stocks, compute the 12-months cumulative intraday returns (intraday momentum). Next, stocks are sorted into deciles based on their intraday momentum. The intraday momentum strategy goes long the top decile while shorting the bottom decile, and positions are held during intraday periods for one month. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on Table 8: Results Following the Up and Down Markets, both the intraday-momentum and overnight-momentum strategies continue to be profitable during different market states