From time to time, stocks experience large swings either upwards or downwards. Unexpected or unanticipated and infrequent movements of large magnitude in the equity market are commonly defined as jumps. Jumps or jump risk is a prominent part of the academical literature; however, from the practitioner´s point of view, the essential piece of information is how the jumps affect stocks.
This research examines the role of jump risk (and also volatility risk) in the cross-section of stock returns. The jump risk is studied through a jump risk-mimicking portfolio which is constructed using straddles and S&P 500 futures options. With a simple linear regression, it is possible to estimate the sensitivity or beta of each stock to the aggregate market jump risk. In line with the other literature, the individual jump risk is priced in the cross-section of stocks, where the least sensitive stocks tend to outperform the highest sensitive stocks.
As a result, a simple, yet both economically and statistically significant trading strategy can be based on the stock´s individual jump risk sensitivity. The investor needs to long the least sensitive stocks and short the most sensitive stocks.

Fundamental reason
There are numerous possible explanations for the jump risk anomaly. For example, the past literature has concluded that the compensation for jump risk is on average more than half of the total equity premium. According to the authors of this research, a negative market price of risk implies that stocks with high sensitivities to innovations in aggregate market jump risk should earn low returns. This theory is in line also with the economic intuition, since such stocks provide hedging opportunities (or insurance) for risk-averse investors. They do not want to bear a high systematic jump risk. However, they need to pay for the hedge.
This results in a statistically and economically significant market anomaly. Moreover, the results are robust, and the quintiles show decreasing performance from the least sensitive to the most sensitive stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of CRSP stocks with prices higher than 1 USD. Jump risk-mimicking portfolio is constructed using S&P 500 futures options. The portfolio is market-neutral, vega neutral, and gamma-positive strategy that consists of a long position in one market-neutral at-the-money straddle with maturity T1, and a short position in market-neutral at-the-money straddles with maturity T2. The T2 is higher than T1, and the size of the short position is chosen to make the overall portfolio vega neutral using Black–Scholes option sensitivities. Straddle returns are computed daily: at the close of the trading day, pick the call and put option pair that is closest to being at-the-money among all options that expire in the next calendar month and the next following calendar month. Each position is held for one trading day. Therefore, pick new option pairs the next day. The sensitivity of each stock to the aggregate market jump risk portfolio is found by linear regression (equation 3) using daily returns over annual rolling periods. Each month, stocks are sorted into quintiles according to their realized jump risk betas. Long the lowest quintile and short the highest quintile. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Probably not, since the strategy goes long stocks with low sensitivity to jump risk and short stocks with high sensitivity to jump risk