The study presents the psychological barrier hypothesis that investors mentally treat the past high price as the upper limit and no longer prefer lottery-like stocks when their prices are close to past highs. Mostly retail, unsophisticated investors are unwilling to buy stocks with price close to the anchor point because they do not expect the stock price will exceed 52-week high, which may or not be an illusion; and rather “invest” in stocks that the price has large room to increase, even if they do not take fundamental reasons into their considerations. According to the authors, it is possible to profit from the skewness effect in stocks that are far from the 52-week high. The presented strategy tries to capitalize on these facts. Scientists also tested for robustness using various subsamples, alternative definitions of lottery stocks, and anchor values.

Fundamental reason
The paper builds on previous research that notions that lottery-like stocks with high skewness earn significant negative abnormal returns. Behavioral finance termed many anchoring effects, one of many that of historical high prices (in past), which sometimes unconsciously influence investors’ decisions. The methodology used consists of portfolio sorting and Fama-MacBeth regressions. The presented strategy tries to exploit main finding when valued much lower than their 52-week high prices, the lottery stocks as proxied by high skewness significantly underperform the non-lottery stocks; in contrast, for stocks near the 52-week high prices, the lottery-like stocks no longer underperform non-lottery-like stocks to form statistically significant alpha. Possible fundamental reasons for explanation include capital gains overhang and under-reaction to the news.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks offered on China A-Shares markets. First, investors calculate the total skewness SKEWNESS as from Eq. (1) (pg. 8), and the nearness to the 52-week highest price (W52) by Eq. (2) (pg. 9) for each stock and then independently double sort into 25 (preliminary) portfolios based on W52 and SKEWNESS. Then, they construct the final value-weighted portfolio from the farthest [1(Far)] of 5 constructed W52-high portfolios going long stocks from the lowest skewness quintile (with the lowest [1(Low)] SKEWNESS) and short(ing) those stocks from highest skewness quintile (with highest [5(High)] SKEWNESS). Portfolio is rebalanced periodically on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -