Wilson (Jul 2023) documents novel empirical findings regarding hedge fund returns. He answers a critical question and challenges the consensus view that hedge fund returns can largely be explained by offering investors concentrated exposure to market crashes, which he deems incomplete. He then tries for a more sophisticated representation of this critical market participant. The classification approach by the author allows us to predict OOS hedge funds with both higher SRs and positive skewness. As for our encyclopedic entry, we select the Short VIX strategy variant for distinguishing hedge funds with an edge from the out-of-sample results interpretation, which is fully presented below.

Fundamental reason
This study highlights an understudied area in the hedge fund literature related to hedge funds that offer high SRs and positive skewness as it presents evidence that shows hedge funds can be divided into two groups, ex-ante: one group, with an edge, that adds value to investors by offering relatively high SRs and positive skewness and another, without edge, with relatively low SRs and negative skewness. Investors allocating to hedge funds in the latter group could get exposure similar to hedge funds by shorting monthly VIX futures contracts. Moreover, these investors would be better off since they would no longer have to pay the relatively high fees associated with hedge funds while earning a higher SR. Investors who have been conditioned to expect high SRs at the expense of negative skewness should instead expect a hedge fund that adds value to their portfolio to offer high SRs and positive skewness. In particular, future work needs to address why hedge fund investors are willing to allocate to hedge funds with negative skewness when they can instead invest in hedge funds that offer higher SRs and convex payoffs. Tackling this line of inquiry will likely lead to a deeper understanding of hedge funds and investor behavior. 

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of hedge funds found in various databases (see below for data sources, for example, in the Lipper Database). The data used in this paper and deemed necessary to replicate the strategy is from the following sources: i) Bloomberg, ii) the Hedge Fund Research (HFR) Database, (iii) the Lipper Hedge Fund Commercial Database (TASS), (iv) OptionMetrics (v) the Fung and Hsieh (2001) trend-following factors, (vi) Kenneth French’s Online Data Library and (vii) the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (FRED).

The selected strategy variant is based on parameters estimated via the Short VIX returns. 3-year rolling regressions estimate the parameters that are the basis for the investment rule. The proposed investment rule to replicate successful hedge funds that have an edge in markets: satisfy the investment rule (i.e., reject the null hypothesis), ˆα [alpha] > 0 and ˆβ [beta] ≤ 0, the final portfolio consists of those hedge funds that satisfy the proposed investment rule. Short VIX strategy has the potential to explain better and predict hedge fund returns so long as that additional variation has incremental explanatory power concerning hedge fund performance. With that, we perform the following linear regression (linear one-factor model) which informs the Null Hypothesis (H0) (equation (7)): HF Returns_t = α + β * Short VIX Returns_t + ε_t, H0 : α ≤ 0 & β > 0 where t corresponds to a monthly frequency, α [alpha] represents the return variation left unexplained by the Short VIX returns, β [beta] represents the hedge funds’ loading on the Short VIX strategy. (The null hypothesis is to be interpreted in the following way: hedge fund returns can be fully explained by positive exposure to the Short VIX strategy benchmark.)

Based on parameters estimated via the Short VIX returns and on an annual rebalancing each December, the final portfolio is equal-weighted with selected hedge funds.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The Short VIX experienced its most pronounced drawdowns during the 2008 Financial Crisis and 2020 COVID-19 Market Crash. The classification approach that allows us to predict OOS hedge funds (and choose them to invest in) with both higher SRs and positive skewness forces us to revisit the leading explanation regarding hedge fund returns and exposure to crash risk.