Despite the stigma associated with a market-timing, evidence of stock return predictability is supported by a growing amount of academic research papers and return predictability is becoming a well-accepted topic in the academic literature. A novel market-timing strategy based on a reliable market-timing model can be constructed combining a large set of forecasting variables (a diverse information set). Namely: Change in Inflation, Industrial Production, Credit Risk Premium, Slope of the Interest Rate Term Structure, Commodity Price, Housing Starts, Exchange Rate, FRB Loan Officer Survey, Delinquencies, New Orders New Shipments, Baltic Dry Index, National Association of Purchasing Managers Survey, Change in Unemployment Rate, Momentum (only past one-month return instead of 12 months return to capture a shorter trend in the data) and PCA of Price Ratios. Using the aforementioned return predictors, weighted least squares regression is made with a stepwise variable selection to build a forecasting model for the next month’s market excess returns. Within each month, the model parameters are held constant, and forecasts are formed using updated predictor values each day. A monthly market-timing strategy is constructed by a transformation of forecast values into investable positions. The restrictions of this transformation include 0% invested in the S&P 500 while having 100% invested in T-bills when the equity premium forecast is zero, secondly, 100% invested in the S&P 500 when the forecast of the equity premium is equal to its historical average and lastly 150% exposure to the S&P 500 when the equity premium forecast is above its historical average. During the backtesting period, the presented strategy outperformed the buy-and-hold S&P 500 with much lower volatility and drawdown. It is worth mentioning that the one-month market-timing model can be combined with a six-month model to a strategy where the one month and six-month models complement each other, resulting in a better performance.

Fundamental reason
The knowledge of return predictability can be used to consistently produced returns which exceed those of buy-and-hold strategy. Macro-economic variables proxy for future investment opportunities as forecasting variables. Although macroeconomic variables are typically thought of as slow-moving, research showed that the combination of them results in the formation of accurate forecasts of next-month excess market returns. Variables as a change in commodity prices, the dollar exchange rate and other variables help to reveal prevailing business conditions. The number of estimated parameters is limited using variable selection, which leads to more parsimonious models which result in better out-of-sample forecasting properties. Weighted least squares (WLS) regression combines variables into a forecasting model where more recent data have a greater influence on the outcome compared to the ordinary least squares method. The bidirectional stepwise selection combines the forward selection, which starts with no variables in the model and adds variables that capture the largest improvement and backward elimination. Aforementioned starts with all candidate variables and removes the least significant variables that do not contribute to the explanatory power of the model.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the S&P 500.

Firstly, consider the set of forecasting variables: Change in Inflation, Industrial Production, Credit Risk Premium, Slope of the Interest Rate Term Structure, Commodity Price, Housing Starts, Exchange Rate, FRB Loan Officer Survey, Delinquencies, New Orders New Shipments, Baltic Dry Index, National Association of Purchasing Managers Survey, Change in Unemployment Rate, Momentum and PCA of Price Ratios.

Secondly, normalize all predictors by dividing by their standard deviations using a backwards-looking window of 500 days.

Consider a forecasting regression of target Y at time t+1 using a set of predictors Z (15 aforementioned variables) at time t (equation can be found on page 7). In a regression model, the alfa is the regression intercept, beta j (j=1,2,…,15) are the forecasting coefficients for every predictor from the set Z and epsilon is the forecast´s error. In this application, Y is the one-month ahead equity risk premium, and Z j,t (j=1,2,…,15) are return predictors which are known in this month (month t). To make sure that the recent data have a larger impact in the model, consider the weighted least square method (WLS) with the objective function which can be found on page 8. WLS uses the decay factor, which is set to 0.99 at the monthly frequency. Estimate the WLS specification which incorporates a bidirectional stepwise procedure (to ensure that only statistically significant variables are added). Variables are chosen based on the Akaike Information Criterion. The stepwise WLS is estimated at the end of each month. Obtain the model parameters at the end of month t-1 (used are months since 06/01/1990), which are held constant for month t. For every day in this month, use the updated return predictors along with the fixed model parameters to produce one-month equity risk premium forecasts on a daily frequency. Next month re-estimate this model using an expanding window (again from 06/01/1990) to obtain new parameter values which are used for the next month’s equity premium forecasts.

The amount invested in the market is determined by transforming the raw equity premium forecasts. Each month, when the estimation of the model is made, get a value for the root mean square error (RMSE) for the fit (a low RMSE indicates the model that fits well and vice versa). Equity premium forecasts are scaled by the inverse of the RMSE and multiplied by five, resulting in the percentual amount invested in the S&P 500. The rest is invested in Treasury-bills if the equity premium forecast is negative; everything is invested in Treasury-bills.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The selected strategy is a class of “Market Timing” strategies which try to rotate out of equities during the time of stress. Therefore the proposed strategy isn’t mainly used as an add-on to the portfolio to hedge equity risk directly. Still, it is more an overlay which can be used to manage the percentual representation of equities (or “equity-like assets”) in a portfolio. “Equity Market Timing” strategy can decrease the overall risk of equities in a portfolio, and it can improve the risk-adjusted returns. Moreover, as strategy’s goal is to hold equity market only in positive times for equity market factor and be out of equities otherwise, therefore this logic can be maybe used to create amended market timing strategy (using original rules) which is out of equities during positive times and holds bonds (or goes short equities) during bad times. This new amended strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. However, performance/risk characteristics and overall correlation and quality of suggested amended strategy can be found out only by rigorous backtest and source academic research paper doesn’t give us any clues on how it will perform…