The strategy of picking stocks based on firms‘ management diversity uses a different approach than traditional, well-known strategies. Stocks are picked using a textual analysis on biographies of firms‘ top management teams, which examines the diversity in areas, such as managers‘ education, past work experience, or skills. Recent empirical research found that firms with diverse management earn considerably higher risk-adjusted returns than those with homogenous management. Then a strategy, which sorts firms into quintiles based on their management diversity (top quintile = highest diversity) and subsequently longs the top quintile and shorts the bottom quintile, earns both economically and statistically significant returns and Sharpe ratio. The strategy also stands rather well in comparison with a selection of well-known anomalies, as it recorded the second-highest average raw return behind the value, but dominated in terms of Sharpe ratio. The phenomenon is especially strong in the case of liquid large-cap stocks. Also, due to a rather stable character of management diversity, the investment turnover is relatively low, which translates to low transaction costs.

Fundamental reason
The authors identified two possible explanations for the anomaly: premium for quality and mispricing. Based on the proxies for quality used in previous literature, the authors found that known quality factors are responsible for up to 25% of the strategy’s alpha. They also suggest that management diversity might be a not-yet-identified quality factor. The effect of mispricing is related to analyst coverage. The intuition is that less analyst coverage means a higher possibility of mispricing the stock.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed at NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ, with available and positive book value, and at least 12 months of past returns at CRSP Database. Firms’ biographical texts are obtained from annual reports at the EDGAR database. The preferred form is in this order: 10-K, 10-KSB, and DEF 14A. The diversity measure is calculated using the formulas (1) and (2) (page 7). D = 0 for firms with only one top executive.
The investor goes long on the top quintile portfolio (portfolio of firms with the most diverse management teams) and short on the bottom quintile (most homogenous). The portfolio is rebalanced on an annual basis and held for one year as well. The stocks in the portfolios are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.