It is already a well-known fact that there are some specific attributes or factors, which are helpful in predicting the returns of individual assets above the return of the broader market. However, factor-based investing and the young new asset class of cryptocurrencies have not previously been brought together, and academic research into the asset pricing and investment characteristics of cryptocurrencies is only now beginning to emerge with a clear motivation – factor-based investing can earn excess returns in the cryptocurrency market. A key difference between the equity market and the cryptocurrency market lies in the fact that the value of the network does not accrue to a centralized corporation, but to the users and participants in the network itself, who participate in the creation, and exchange of the associated currency. Additionally, cryptocurrencies can be characterized as decentralized currencies with extremely high volatility. One of the three factors from the recent paper about cryptocurrency factors is carried. The carry can be viewed as the price return if underlying fundamentals do not change. Carry is typically defined for futures or forwards that reference an underlying asset and said, it is the return implied to the holder of the future or forward contract if the price of the underlying asset stays the same. The proposed factor in the paper exploits the fact that all cryptocurrencies have rules built into their protocols that govern the issuance of new coins, as a by-product of the mining process. Carry for cryptocurrencies asks what will be the price return of currency if the underlying demand either driven by economic activity on the blockchain or by speculative activity, does not change. It stands to reason that the currency would naturally lose nominal value according to the current run rate of mining based inflation through the mining (creation of the new coins). By the aforementioned definition, inflation is positive, and high carry in cryptocurrency universe amounts to having low inflation in the form of new coin issuance. Cryptocurrency carry can be defined as the negative of the sum total coin issuance over the preceding seven days, divided by the coins outstanding at the beginning of that seven day period.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, even though there exists a relatively short sample of just over four years, it contains enough meaningful variation (in factors and returns) to draw robust conclusions thanks to the generally extremely high volatility in the cryptocurrency universe. Secondly, the fast “metabolism” of cryptocurrencies results in studying weekly returns, with portfolios being rebalanced once a week and then held for seven trading days. The high volatility of cryptocurrency returns can be viewed as a good thing because it means that economically meaningful allocations can be obtained by using only a fraction of the available capital, a critical advantage in portfolios that cannot borrow or use leverage. High volatility assets are convenient because it is always possible to allocate less to them simply. From the practical point of view, by using some factor, one would expect to deliver returns that cannot be obtained by simply investing in the passive benchmark. To test if this holds, various benchmark portfolios were used in a linear regression of carry portfolio returns on benchmark returns. Results proved that carry has some added value and can be used to form a profitable investment strategy even in the universe of cryptocurrencies since the linear regressions have positive alphas and solid information ratio. Lastly, carry needs a different standardization as momentum or value. By definition, carry is closest to an expected return metric if demand does not change, carry should quantify the price impact, rather than just being indicative of expected return. Since the carry is by definition, closer to an expected return, then the investor should consider the risk that needs to be taken to garner that inspected return. Therefore, the paper chooses to standardize the raw carry metric by the volatility of the underlying currency return.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 11 cryptocurrencies (the full list can be found in the paper). The raw carry metric is defined as the negative of the sum total coin issuance over the preceding seven days, divided by the coins outstanding at the beginning of those seven days (the data are available at coinmetrics.io). After that, the raw carry factor is standardized by the volatility of the underlying currency return, separately for each currency. The portfolio is equally weighted, where the absolute weight is 10% divided by n, where 10% is the gross exposure limit (only 10% of the portfolio is invested in cryptocurrencies), and n is the number of currencies available for investment. The weight is positive when the longitudinally standardized value factor is above zero and negative when this factor is below zero; this allows portfolios that can be net long or short the market. However, it is not possible to short cryptocurrencies, and the practical application would require, for example, a long-only strategy. The portfolio is rebalanced weekly. Last but not least, there are two weighting schemes, the second one is risk-based and more information about it is in the paper, we have chosen the equally-weighted strategy for representative purposes.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. However, recent academic research paper shows that bitcoin returns resemble returns of high sentiment beta stocks (https://quantpedia.com/Blog/Details/bitcoin-returns-resemble-returns-of-high-sentiment-beta-stocks); therefore, it’s questionable if cryptocurrency strategies are appropriate to hedge equity market risk during bear markets …

