Experts and scientists have been warning about climate change for decades now. It poses a great risk to all life on Earth, and if we, people living on this planet, hope to preserve its beauty for future generations, some changes have to be made. The largest contributor to this problem is the emission of greenhouse gasses, especially carbon dioxide. As this topic gains awareness among the general population and the urgency to act is escalating, the question of whether all this could be reflected in the financial market arises.
In this study, the group of authors finds that a company’s intensity of carbon emissions is an indicator of its overall efficiency and that low rates of emissions could indicate better performance of the company. As the general awareness of climate problems rises, the literature studying the pricing of firms’ sustainability and eco-friendliness is also expanding. This study offers a view on potential return-predictability based on these signals. It finds that low carbon firms outperform high carbon firms, but this relationship is even stronger among the sectors that are considered to be the largest polluters, which are defined as the companies belonging to high climate impact NACE sectors, which are classified according to the EU Technical Expert Group for Paris Aligned Portfolios. This can be used to create a portfolio that shorts high polluters and longs the companies with the lowest carbon emissions to create a compelling strategy while at the same time supporting the fight against climate change.

Fundamental reason
The authors show that the high intensity of emissions in a firm is correlated with their relatively low productivity, inefficient supply change, or similar issues. On the other hand, low emissions are mostly tied to higher measures of firm performance, such as gross profitability or return on assets. This difference has been evident since 2015 when the Paris Accord was signed. Since then, the pressure to lower carbon emissions has intensified, and efficient, eco-friendly companies have started to perform significantly better. Moreover, high carbon emissions can be tied to higher carbon taxes or clean-up costs, all working to the disadvantage of the highest polluters.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of MSCI ACWI stocks belonging to the high climate impact NACE sectors. For every company, we calculate their previous fiscal year’s carbon emission intensity, that is Scope 1&2 emissions divided by sales. Scope 1 emissions are company-specific direct greenhouse gasses – meaning those emanated directly from the sources owned and/or controlled by the company. Scope 2 are indirect greenhouse gasses, that is the byproduct of electricity given company consumes. Source for both Scope 1&2 emission data is MSCI. Construct a value-weighted portfolio that goes long the 30% least emission-intensive companies and goes short the top 30% emission-intensive companies. Rebalance monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include enough information to be sure about any possible uses as a hedge.