The momentum strategy has had success in the investment world since it is a persistent strategy across all major asset classes. The price momentum is most commonly understood as a phenomenon in which assets that recently enjoyed high (low) returns relative to others are more likely to experience high (low) returns in the future. It is customarily implemented as a cross-sectional trading strategy among individual stocks or long-only equity portfolios. It has an impressive and robust track record of risk-adjusted performance.
Many previous articles on Quantpedia have described the momentum. Among them, there is a cross-sectional factor momentum in the article 510 Factor Momentum. However, factor momentum can be successfully implemented also as a time-series momentum strategy, as presented in this novel research. The research done by Gupta and Kelly presents findings of momentum among equity factors (in the time series and in the cross-section) which strongly supports the conclusion that factor momentum is a pervasive phenomenon in financial markets.
The research shows that individual factors can be successfully timed based on their own past performance. A time-series momentum trading strategy that scales exposure to a given factor in proportion with its past one-month return generates excess performance over and above the raw factor. Additionally, a combined strategy that averages one-month time-series momentum of all factors earns an annual Sharpe ratio of 0.84, exceeding the performance of any individual factor’s time-series momentum. A combined portfolio built on these foundations of individual factor timing strategies is called a time series factor momentum (TSFM).
The factor momentum is a truly global phenomenon as it earns an economically large and statistically significant alpha after controlling for stock momentum.

Fundamental reason
To support their strategy, authors built on the already known theory about momentum. Firstly, it is the fact that individual factors exhibit robust time-series momentum – a performance persistence phenomenon by which an asset’s recent return predicts its future returns. Secondly, the research shows that individual factors can indeed be successfully timed based on their past performance.
The TSFM strategy is compared to two natural benchmarks – an equal-weighted average of the raw factors and the traditional stock-level momentum strategy using the 2-12 formation strategy. The second benchmark partially explains the performance of TSFM, particularly when TSFM is based on a matched 2-12 formation period. While the factor momentum is strongest at the one-month horizon, there are benefits to longer formation periods as well. An important differentiating feature of TSFM is the stability of its behaviour with respect to the look-back window. TSFM is robust and exhibits positive momentum, whether it is based on prior one-month, one-year, or even five-year performance.
A natural alternative strategy is to construct factor momentum relative to the performance of the other factors in the cross-section (cross-section factor momentum – CSFM). CSFM and TSFM have a correlation above 0.90 for any formation window, and the standalone average returns and Sharpe ratios of CSFM and TSFM are very similar. However, when we regress TSFM returns on CSFM, we find positive and highly significant TSFM alphas, yet CSFM generally has negative (and significant) alphas controlling for TSFM. Their high correlation and opposing alphas reveal that TSFM and CSFM are fundamentally the same phenomena, but that the time series approach provides a purer measure of expected factor returns than the cross-sectional method. The net standalone Sharpe ratios of TSFM and CSFM continue to exceed those of stock momentum, industry momentum, short-term reversal, and the Fama-French factors.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 65 characteristic-based factor portfolios constructed using US stocks. Firstly, construct characteristic-based factor portfolios. The following key forms the factors: for each period, cross-sectionally windsorize the top and bottom 1% of raw characteristic values. After, split the investment universe into large and small stocks with a cutoff equal to median NYSE market capitalization. Further, divide these stocks into low/medium/high characteristic values according to a 30/40/30 percentile split. Breakpoints are taken over NYSE stocks for the US sample. For each group, form value-weighted portfolios and then combine these into a long-short factor portfolio according to 0.5×(“Large High” + “Small High”)  – 0.5×(“Large Low” + “Small Low”). The portfolios are constructed monthly. The TSGM strategy dynamically scales one-month returns of factor i according to its performance over the past month (using the z-score transformation described by equation 1). If formation returns are positive, the strategy buys the factor. If returns are negative, strategy sells the factor. The overall TSFM strategy combines all individual factor time-series momentum strategies into a single portfolio. The long and short legs are rescaled to form a unit leverage (1 USD long and 1 USD short) TSFM portfolio. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide information about hedging properties