Numerous academic studies show that the S&P 500 index average daily returns during Federal Open Market Committee meetings since 1980 are outstanding – more than five times greater than returns during other average days on the market. However, one new study goes further. It documents striking bi-weekly pattern in the average excess return on stocks over Treasury bills centred around FOMC meetings. The equity premium over the last 20-years was earned entirely in weeks 0, 2, 4 and 6 in FOMC cycle time, where the FOMC cycle starts on the day before a scheduled FOMC announcement day and resets at each of the eight times the FOMC meets per year. This pattern allows the investor to create a profitable market timing strategy. There is a lack of really strong fundamental explanation for the existence of this effect. Authors of the study assume that pattern is caused by news (about monetary policy or the macroeconomy) coming from the Federal Reserve. Still, the regular bi-weekly pattern seems suspicious and might be only a result of data mining. But still, we see this study valuable as it is the first paper which performed the cyclical analysis of average returns during days around FOMC meeting (and not only during FOMC meeting).

Fundamental reason
The academic paper speculates that pattern may be a result of board meetings of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve. Authors find that the biweekly stock return cycle is driven mainly by even week observations that follow those meetings. While there are eight scheduled FOMC meetings per year, the board of governors has board meetings 30 times per year on average.

Simple trading strategy
The investor is invested in stocks during FOMC cycle weeks (going long S&P 500 ETF, fund, future or CFD in weeks 0, 2, 4, 6 only). Otherwise, he is invested in cash during the remaining days. The FOMC cycle starts on the day before a scheduled FOMC announcement day and resets at each of the eight times the FOMC meets per year.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy is timing equity market but invests long-only into equity market factor (even that only for a short period of time) therefore is not suitable as a hedge/diversification during market/economic crises.