The CAPM model has been well documented and widely used in academia for explaining the cross-section of expected stock returns. However, in practice this model is not implementable due its failure of justifying risk-reward relationship of stocks. Therefore, numerous studies have been searching for alternative sources of explanation of this negative relationship. One aspect of research is analyzing market betas during market downturns which are called bear betas.

Novel research shows that the CAPM model extended by a linear component of the index-driven bear risk factor is in fact a time-varying beta model which is not able to explain the negative relationship of the risk-reward. This shows that high bear beta stocks are considered risky during market downturns and earn low expected returns, which contradicts the canonical asset pricing theory. The authors also demonstrate that this pattern reminisces the Betting-against-Beta puzzle (BaB), but it is a deepened version.
Moreover, compared to previous studies, the novel research shows that the bear risk factor captures the ex-ante tail risk and risk factors are constructed from put option returns. The bear risk factor consists of three main components: IV-driven, linear and non-linear (index-driven). The only empirical explanation for the negative risk-reward anomaly is the aggregate disagreement channel. If there was no disagreement about future market returns, then the positive risk-reward would hold according to the canonical asset pricing theory.

Naturally, such a result can be a base of the trading strategy which go long low bear beta stocks in the bottom decile and go short high bear beta stocks in the top decile, creating a zero-investment strategy.

Fundamental reason
Stocks with high (low) loadings on the bear risk factor should generate high (low) expected returns during the market downturns according to the canonical asset pricing theory. In other words, investors are willing to pay a downside premium for stocks that hedge any form of jump or disaster risk. Bear betas should be positively correlated with expected returns, but according to the study, the portfolios shows negative beta-return relationship which is reminiscent to the BaB anomaly. The only explanation for resolving this anomaly is the aggregate disagreement channel which says that investors have different expectations about future market returns, resulting in high bear-beta stocks overpricing. If there was no aggregate disagreement in the market, then the negative sign of the anomaly would change to positive which is consistent with the traditional asset pricing theory. Finally, the strategy cannot be spanned by Fama-French-Carhart four-factor model.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks extracted from CRSP. Firm fundamentals information is obtained from Compustat and asset pricing factors from Kenneth French’s website. Other asset pricing factors are directly collected from the authors of a particular study paper who created those factors. SPX options are collected from OptionMetrics ranging from January 1996 to December 2017.
The simple trading strategy is proposed as follows. In order to estimate bear betas, the two-factor regression is performed using the previous 12 months’ five-day returns which are observable at the daily frequency. The dependent variable is each individual stock return (i) and the independent variables are market portfolio return and bear factor return. After obtaining bear betas, the stocks are sorted into deciles based on estimated bear betas. In the top decile are high bear beta stocks and in the bottom decile are low bear beta stocks. A zero-investment portfolio is constructed by going long the bottom decile and short the top decile. The portfolios are rebalanced at the monthly frequency and are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - some applications of presented strategies fulfill the assessment; the bear beta portfolio is particularly good at hedging the risk within certain categories.