Momentum and reversal strategies are among the most recognized, and both effects were identified in several markets, ranging from equities, commodities, cryptos, and others. Furthermore, both effects are well-researched, and academics have tried to understand and explain the reasons behind these anomalies. Some research even points to the fact that the alpha of these two anomalies has disappeared. Blitz et al. show that the short-term reversal is no exception and that the original short-term reversal, defined as the previous month’s return (STR), is flat and merely offers the premium. The authors summarize previous results and further expand them.
Firstly, the original short-term reversal goes against the industry and factor momentum, two well-recognized factors. Therefore, they argue that it is possible to revive the STR strategy by removing these factor exposures by either using industry-adjusted (neutral) STR or by adjusting the stock returns for Fama and French factors and getting a residual STR strategy. The authors examine both strategies and their returns among US, European, Pacific, and EM equity markets, but this screener’s addition focuses on the industry-neutral STR. Last but not least, the authors also discuss the transaction costs, which can be exceptionally high for such a high turnover strategy. However, the adjusted STR might be applied either in the ultra-liquid universe, as a building block of a more complex strategy, or tactically, as the STR returns should spike during market turmoils (see Nagel, 2012).

Fundamental reason
Usually, the literature considers three alternatives to why the STR strategies should work. The bid/ask bounce effect, which authors describe as an incomplete explanation since the strategy offers a premium even when the mid-quotes are used. The explanation could be behavioral, but this is also improbable as all other time frames exhibit momentum (over- and under-reaction). Also, the short-term one-month factor and industry returns show momentum.
The STR strategy’s most common and accepted reason is based on liquidity. To be more precise, the premium is a reward for the liquidity provision, and short-term reversal investors act like liquidity providers. That should also be why the STR should work even better during market turmoils (Nagel, 2012).
Last, but not least, it’s necessary to account for the industry returns or factor momentum – as the unadjusted short-term reversal does not seem to work anymore.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of MSCI World stocks (mid- and large-cap stocks), and the sample period spans from 1985 to 2022. The returns are retrieved monthly and in US dollars. The data are obtained from Datastream Prices, Worldscope Fundamentals, and S&P Compustat. As a first step, calculate the industry-specific reversal for each stock as a return of the stock minus its industry return (based on GICS level 3) over the prior month. Secondly, at the end of each month, sort stocks into quintiles. Long the bottom quintile and short the top quintile. The strategy is rebalanced monthly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Research papers show that short-term reversal strategies are effective because they provide liquidity, which is especially sought during market turmoils (e.g., Nagel, 2012). However, each crisis is different, and it depends on the degree, length, and other unique characteristics of each crisis.