Observation that small retail investors are less likely to participate in high-priced stocks on Chinese markets is utilized by researches into forming their own new hypotheses. In the U.S., where institutions are more dominant, there is no evidence of a positive relation between momentum and price. On the other hand, researches found this to be exact opposite in Chinese markets for high-priced stocks. Paper basis works with idea that small retail investors (which tend to be more active in low-priced stocks) cause reversals which offset momentum caused by underreaction of better informed traders, such as institutions. Short-term reversals are strongest in the lowest-priced stocks and weakest in highest-priced stocks, a pattern that is opposite to that for momentum. Momentum in the high-priced group is strongest for stocks held relatively more by mutual funds. Scientists also find that small investors’ participation increases and momentum profits decrease after splits in high-priced stocks. Thus, overall the results paint a picture that institutions contribute to momentum, and reversals induced by retail investors attenuate momentum.

Fundamental reason
Authors provide appealing evidence that stock prices influence participation via a financial constraint imposed by the round lot restriction. Final conclusion is that relatively reduced participation of small investors (retail traders) on high-priced stocks is unlikely due to investors’ preferences/beliefs, but rather, mostly due to financial constraints. The prices of stocks with already high prices increase, their direct holdings by small investors decrease, but their indirect holdings via mutual funds do not appreciably change. Main tested hypothesis which continues previous research is that the short-horizon trades of small retail investors tend to cause reversals, which offset momentum caused by underreaction to information signals. In plain language, decreasing (increasing) the fraction of small investors strengthens (weakens) momentum returns. Important variables that explain these differences are roundlot (100-share minimum) rule, effect of Chinese-markets specific trading halts (due to shareholders’ meetings, or significant corporate events, such as M&A discussions and processes; which can last as well as several months), and stock splits.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese stocks. Investor independently sorts stocks into deciles groups based on nominal prices and quintile groups based on cumulative returns over past 1 month and then builds portfolio by buying losers from the bottom priced decile and selling winers from the bottom priced decile. Portfolios are equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Not presented.