Machine learning strategies in the equity market are becoming a popular research topic and are widely used in practice. Abundant previous studies were concentrated on equities at the stock level rather than at the country level.
Past research has found that implementing machine learning to forecast equity returns can generate significant economic gains. This novel research examines equity returns using similar machine learning strategies in the cross-country setting (country-level). According to the paper, 88 market characteristics (predictors) have been used. Still, only the top 10 predictors are the key drivers of the cross-section of country equity returns, market value, and long-run reversal prove particularly dominant predictors. Furthermore, none of the machine learning strategies is perfect and, as a result, leads to a high individual forecast variance. Therefore, a traditional method of combination of machine learning methods works well. Similar to past studies, the novel research shows that the main sources of country equity premia’s cross-sectional predictability are mispricing rather than risk-based explanations. However, the predictability appears to fade over time gradually.
The proposed investment strategy goes long quintile of markets with the highest returns predictions and short quintile of markets with the lowest returns predictions.

Fundamental reason
There are two main explanations for the functionality of the strategy: risk and mispricing. The authors constructed portfolios from bivariate sorts based on risk changes and returns predictions from the forecast combination machine learning method. They showed that risk-based explanation is insignificant and that evidence tends to lean towards a mispricing explanation. The mispricing should be boosted due to limits to arbitrage, particularly in small and emerging markets, which are typically illiquid. Another reason is the behavioral narrative of equity anomalies driven by investors’ irrationality and limited financial knowledge. Similar to equity returns at the stock level, the cross-sectional predictability fades over time. In addition, a combined model, which is a combination of all machine learning methods, works well in terms of model variance reduction compared to an individual model. Finally, the investment strategy is not explained by a well-known CAPM model. Thus, the abnormal returns are statistically significant.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 71 country stock markets from January 1985 to April 2021. Stock markets returns have been calculated using Datastream Global Equity Indices. A risk-free return (the one-month U.S. Treasury bill rate) was obtained from the French library. Furthermore, 88 market characteristics are calculated using different data sources: Datastream, GFD, Bloomberg, PRS Group, and V-Dem. Since machine learning strategies require the configuration of hyperparameters, the full sample was split into three subsamples: training, validation, and testing sample. The testing period was from January 1995 to April 2021.
As the first step, the excess returns of the country index in the following month (t+1) are obtained via all machine learning techniques. These methods include OLS, PCA, PLS, LASSO, ENET, RF, GBRT, FFN1, FFN2, FFN3, and COMB, which is a combination of all methods (Appendix B provides more information about each individual method and their hyperparameters). Market characteristics such as market value, long-run reversal, earnings yield, market breadth, and long-term momentum (Appendix A provides the full list) have been used as dominant predictors in all machine learning models. Each month, all country stock markets are ranked based on their predictions returns for one month ahead. These markets are then sorted into quintiles and form equal-weighted portfolios. Finally, a zero-investment hedge portfolio is constructed by long markets with the highest forecast returns in the top quintiles and short markets with the lowest forecast returns in the bottom quintiles. The portfolios are rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Although the performance is quite stable, it is an equity strategy with sizeable max drawdowns/monthly losses (Table 4).