Risk premium or excess return refers to the amount of return by which the risky asset is expected to outperform the risk-free asset. Risk premia is an important factor in investment strategies; hence it is a focus of many research papers. As Freyeberger et al. (2020) and Gu et al. (2020) have shown, there exists a strong empirical evidence that suggests cross-sectional risk premia associated with firm-level characteristics differ significantly through time and often reach considerably high volatility during the times of economic distress. This novel research proposed by S. C. Smith and A. Timmermann allows us to further understand the instability in risk premia and subsequently the additional risk brought to individual stocks and equity portfolios. They do this by identifying pervasive and discrete changes in cross-sectional risk premia which they refer to as “breaks”. During their research, they found strong ex-post evidence of mispricing of individual stocks during the “break regimes”, which has proven to be much greater for less liquid microcaps. By constructing a break risk factor based on the difference between forecasts of individual stock returns based on models with and without breaks they explore the relation between sensitivity to the break risk factor and stock earnings. Moreover, they further generalize their own break framework to differentiate between market-wide and style-specific breaks and to identify whether characteristic-sorted portfolios or specific industries are hit by the breakpoint cycle earlier or later. Break risk is particularly important to long-term buy-and-hold investors who do not rotate their portfolio allocations very frequently, but it can also be important to short-term investors because of the challenges associated with detecting breaks and updating estimates of risk premia in real time. However, the most interesting aspect of the break factor is that it can be a base of a successful trading strategy. Break risk factor should be generally larger for stocks with greater exposure to break risk. Consequently, individual stocks with greater exposure to break risk earn higher average returns and higher risk premia.

Fundamental reason
First, Smith and Timmermann empirically recognized that variations in risk premia coincide with the economically significant events in the past and are associated with the large change in aggregate valuation measures. Secondly, the approach used is based on the economically motivated priors to ensure that the variation in risk premia falls within ranges that are economically plausible (benchmark returns are either excess returns or returns on zero-investment portfolios). The prior is chosen in a way that ensures that economically unreasonably high Sharpe ratio is unlikely. Furthermore, this novel research estimates the risk premia directly in a single step by regressing firms’ stock returns on a set of stock or firm characteristics (Bayesian panel break methodology) opposed to widely used two-stage approach which increases parameter estimation error. The panel regression approach to modelling shifts in the risk premium process allows identifying regime shifts which are long-lasting and large as opposed to the smaller and local shifts. Moreover, Smith and Timmermann evaluate mispricing from the model that they build on the framework of Fama and French (2020), which they further generalize to allow for structural breaks that capture factor risk premia which undergo occasional variations at unknown times.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. Stocks should be included only if they have a market value on CRSP at the end of the previous month and a value for common equity in the firm’s financial statement. The first step is to regress the individual stock returns on the aggregate log dividend-price ratio using the panel break model both with and without breaks (equation 4). For each individual stock and each month in the sample, compute the difference between forecasts from panel model with breaks and without breaks and form that way a new characteristic – instability factor BRK – break risk factor (equation 5). Breaks are estimated using the Bayesian panel breakpoint approach and are empirically identified. Moreover, this novel research estimates the posterior probabilities of the number and location of the breaks, which confirms their empirical findings.
The next step is to construct quintile portfolios sorted according to the instability factor (BRK). The following strategy is to go long on the quintile with the highest BRK (the most break-sensitive quintile) and short on the quintile with the lowest BRK (the least break-sensitive quintile). The portfolio is rebalanced monthly and is value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -