No doubt, hedge funds are highly sophisticated market participants. According to this novel research, hedge funds can also be characterized as insurance sellers or insurance buyers. Funds described as either sellers or buyers by using regression and estimating the sensitivity (beta) of hedge funds to a bear portfolio orthogonalized to the market. Returns of such a portfolio reflect the change in ex-ante concerns about future bear market states also considering concurrent market returns. The bear portfolio is constructed using put options on the S&P 500 index and is profitable if the market is in the bear state. Therefore, low bear beta funds are characterized as insurance sellers, and high bear beta funds are characterized as insurance buyers. The differences in returns seem to be comparable to classical insurance products, where insurance companies are able to make a significant profit. The profit of insurance companies is not a surprise; after all, actuaries need to make sure that the insurance company would be profitable.
According to the results, the same holds in hedge funds. Insurance sellers outperform insurance buyers, or in other words, low bear beta funds outperform high bear beta funds. Insurance sellers should generate higher average returns compared to insurance buyers by a simple mechanism. They are more exposed to bear the market risk. Still, sellers may not always be exposed to realized tail risk. To sum it up, it is possible to base a profitable trading strategy by identifying funds with low sensitivity to the bear portfolio and taking a long position in them.

Fundamental reason
According to the authors, the risk exposure of each hedge fund can be seen as a combination of its unhedged market exposure, and its exposure to the market hedged Bear portfolio. Additionally, comparing high and low bear beta funds, their unhedged market exposure is almost identical. Therefore, the difference in their returns should be caused by their different exposure to the Bear market portfolio.
Moreover, if the hedged Bear portfolio return is negative, there are two possible explanations. Firstly, the price of insurance does not increase enough to cover or compensate for the negative market return. Secondly, it could decrease more than expected if there is a positive market return. As a result, insurance sellers outperform insurance buyers. On the other hand, in the situation where the hedged Bear portfolio return is positive, in absolute terms, the insurance return is larger than the negative market return or decreases less than what is expected given a positive market return. In this situation, the “rule” reverts, hedge funds classified as insurance buyers outperform insurance sellers. Overall, the logic is in line with basic insurance; if nothing terrible happens, insurance sellers are profitable. However, in the case of disaster, insurance buyers are profitable.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of hedge funds from the Hedge Fund Research database. Small funds with less than $10 million of assets under management are omitted. For the construction of the bear portfolio, S&P500 index options, daily S&P500 index level, VIX level, the dividend yield of S&P500 and risk-free rate are needed. Firstly, compute the forward price of the S&P500 as index level continuously compounded by the difference between the risk-free rate and dividend yield using the time to maturity T. Bear portfolio pays 1 USD when the S&P 500 index level on a given date is in a bear state, and zero otherwise. The portfolio is constructed by trading options. A long position is taken in a put option with strike price K1, and a short position is taken in a put option with strike price K2, where the price of a long position is higher than the price of a short position. Positions are scaled by the difference between the K1 and K2 (equation 1 in the paper). The strike price of a short position is chosen to be 1,5 standard deviations below the S&P 500 index forward price and strike price of the long position is set to be one standard deviation below the forward price. Since the exact strike prices likely do not exist, the paper utilizes the trading-volume weighted average price of puts with strike prices within a 0,25 standard deviation range of the target strikes (which can be easily denoted and represented by sums, as shown in equation 2 and 3). The bear factor is based on the bear portfolio: on a monthly basis, buy the bear portfolio using put options that have the shortest maturity, but with more than one month to expiration. The price is calculated by taking averages of closing bid-ask quotes. Finally, the bear factor is the excess return of the portfolio that is calculated by subtracting one-month risk-free rate. The last step consists of finding the bear beta by running a time-series regression of the fund’s monthly excess returns on the market excess returns and the Bear factor using 24-months period. Funds are sorted into quintiles according to their bear beta, and the bottom quintile is bought. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy is based on the result that on average insurance sellers outperform insurance buyers, however, during bear markets, the Bear portfolio return is positive, and the situation reverts. Insurance buyers outperform insurance sellers and strategy longs insurance sellers. It might be profitable during bear markets to modify the strategy and long insurance buyers.