Unprecedented monetary and fiscal easing in recent years has raised inflationary pressures. With inflation on the horizon, investors started to look for diversified portfolios containing an inflation hedge. This paper examines whether it is possible to protect the traditional 60/40 portfolio during inflationary times. Neville et al. (2021) found that since 1926, neither equities nor bonds perform well in real terms during inflationary regimes. Froot (1995) found that almost any combination of commodities does reasonably well in protecting bond portfolios against inflation. However, oil is needed to effectively hedge stock portfolios. Consistent with these findings, the author recommends a dynamic allocation, that includes the oil in the portfolio when the oil is scarce. Oil futures term structure has historically provided reliable signals of oil scarcity. An investor can enhance the returns of the traditional 60/40 allocation by including the oil in the portfolio in backwardation. In contango, the investor stays with a 60/40 allocation. The proposed dynamic strategy exhibits a Sharpe ratio of 1.00 in a full sample with only one year of negative returns. Thus, investing in dynamic allocation (1.00) doubles the Sharpe ratio compared to the traditional portfolio (0.50).

Fundamental reason
Commodities historically proved as the best asset during the high and rising inflation. As mentioned in Neville et al. (2021), commodity baskets had a perfect track record of generating positive real returns across inflationary regimes in the U.S. with an annualized +14% real return. Additionally, Gorton et al. (2013) examined 31 commodity futures and found a connection between the backwardation in futures contracts and low inventories (scarcity). With lower prices in back-month futures contracts relative to the spot month, there is no return for storing the commodity. In backwardation, the market motivates the commodity delivery for immediate use, resulting in low inventory levels. Besides, the proposed allocation is robust to the upcoming shift in the energy market, when oil will stop being the crucial fuel in the global economy. An investor in dynamic allocation can be agnostic when an energy transition could occur. Dynamic allocation does not include oil futures within its asset allocation when there is an oil surplus. As long as the current paradigm holds, the investor in a dynamic allocation can outperform the traditional 60/40 portfolio. Under a new paradigm of oil abundance, the investor will be invested in the 60/40 portfolio.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the front E-Mini S&P 500 futures contracts, 10-Year Treasury futures contracts, and Brent futures contracts. Allocate 30% in E-Mini S&P 500 futures, 30% in Brent futures, and 40% in 10-Year Treasury futures if the previous trading day’s Brent front-month-to-back-month spread is trading at a premium (backwardation). Otherwise (contango), allocate 60% in E-Mini S&P 500 futures and 40% in 10-Year Treasury futures.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Although the portfolio has lower drawdowns – it is a variation of classical 60/40, the portfolio is largely invested in the equity market.