The underlying volatility is one of the main pricing factors of options, and higher volatility results in more expensive options. But is the priced volatility in options fair? Hull, Li, and Qiao (2021) suggest that the fair value of an option is based on breakeven volatility computed as implied volatility that sets the profit (loss) of a delta-hedged position to zero. Using historical prices, the authors calculate the breakeven volatilities and option values for SPY ETF and speculate that this is the fair price. However, the real-time breakeven volatility computation would require perfect foresight, which is unreal in practice.
The authors overcome this problem by building a non-parametric option pricing model that is built on two-stage regression. The research links the option characteristics such as moneyness, implied volatility, time to expiration (and many more) with the breakeven volatility. Naturally, once calibrated, this pricing model could predict unknown breakeven volatilities and fair options prices. Additionally, it is purely based on option characteristics and hence, is non-parametric. The research not only studies the pricing model’s performance but also estimates its usability in a trading strategy. For example, the pricing model could be utilized in a strategy that determines the fair value of the option, compares it with the market price, and enters in a delta-hedged position if the option is over or under-valued.

Fundamental reason
The authors speculate that the breakeven volatility is the fair measure of the volatility, and if the market-implied volatility is different, the options are mispriced, or there is a risk premium. If the implied volatility is higher than the breakeven volatility, this option is expensive, and the short delta-hedged position should result in a profit. On the other hand, if the implied volatility is lower than the breakeven, the option is cheap, and a delta-hedged long position should result in a profit. Therefore, the strategy is based on measuring the fair price, and it utilizes any significant deviations from the fair price.
Additionally, the parametric approach is better than nonparametric when the underlying return dynamics are known. In theory, the parametric models can be perfect, but the assumptions might not be met in real practice. The nonparametric models might be better when the assumptions are violated, and although they can require large sets of data (which is not a problem in modern times), they can be robust to specification errors. Moreover, once the model is calibrated, it can be easily used to determine unknown prices.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of SPY options and SPY ETF. The option prices, implied volatility, and deltas are obtained from SpiderRock, and other data are obtained from Bloomberg. The trading strategy utilizes the difference between “fair” options prices based on breakeven volatility and market prices. Therefore, the idea is to compute the breakeven price using a non-parametric model that is calibrated based on expanding set of data. The first step is the calculation of past breakeven volatilities. The breakeven volatility is defined as volatility that sets the profit and loss from a delta-hedged option position to zero. For example, for call options, the fair value of options is computed from 5 to 74 trading days before expiration, and the calculation starts with the five days before expiration, where the call value is taken to be the market value. Then move to the previous day, calculate the fair value and iteratively continue (this process has perfect foresight and is only used for the model’s calibration, a similar approach can be used for put options). Secondly, transform the fair values into volatilities using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. As the next step, calibrate the pricing model that consists of two regressions. For the first regression with intercept, the dependent variables are the logarithms of breakeven volatilities and independent variables include VIX, VVIX, a GARCH forecast of the volatility of the S&P 500 over the same horizon as the time to expiration of the option (with an adjustment for the overnight component of volatility), square root of time to expiration (trading days untill expiration divided by 252), moneyness of the option calculated as the natural log of the price of the underlying divided by the strike price, implied volatility of the option closest to at-the-money which is calculated using Black-Scholes option pricing model, the market implied volatility of the option which is calculated using Black-Scholes option pricing model, the difference between the delta of the option and the ATM delta, vega which is calculated using Black-Scholes option pricing model, gamma which is calculated using Black-Scholes option pricing model, VIX multiplied by the square root of time to expiration, 0.5 multiplied by the VIX squared, multiplied by the time to expiration, squared moneyness, squared implied volatility, squared difference between the delta of the option and the ATM delta and cubed difference between the delta of the option and the ATM delta. Moreover, VIX and the GARCH forecast of the volatility of the S&P 500 are orthogonalized – run OLS regressions of either VIX or GARCH volatility forecast (individually) on the implied volatility of the option closest to at-the-money; the resulting residuals are either orthogonalized VIX or GARCH predictors which are uncorrelated with implied volatility. The first regression provides us with the expectation of logged breakeven volatility, but it cannot be directly mapped to the expected volatility because of Jensen’s inequality.
For the solution, run the second regression where the breakeven volatility is explained by the exp of logged fitted breakeven volatility. The second regression does not include an intercept. These two regressions and their coefficients are used to predict unknown breakeven volatilities based on data. The model is firstly calibrated on a period of January 2013 to December 2014 and is refitted each year using expanding window. Each day scan through all available out-of-money options with expiration between 5 and 74 trading days. Predict the breakeven volatility based on the pricing model and check if the difference between the breakeven dollar value (price implied by breakeven volatility) and the midpoint between the bid and ask prices is greater than one dollar. If the breakeven price is lower than mid-price, sell the contract, and if the breakeven price is higher than mid-price, buy the contract. All trades are delta-hedged and held until five days before expiration.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not state whether the strategy could be used as a hedge, but based on the minimal max drawdowns, we can speculate that the strategy could work during crises. Additionally, the strategy trades the “volatility” and is delta-hedged.