Everybody knows that stocks are risky and volatile. Expected “riskiness” of stocks could be observed via option implied volatility – it gauges the perceived risks to investors regarding expected stock returns, such risks are “known unknowns,” i.e., dynamics that investors know they don’t know. However, this implied volatility is also volatile and often strongly moves. Academics research shows this volatility of volatility (a measure of “unknown unknowns”) is very useful as it has the predictive ability for future stocks’ returns. Stocks with a higher vol-of-vol earn significantly lower future returns. The effect cannot be explained by common risk factors and is strong, especially between large-cap stocks. This makes it very valuable for portfolio diversification.

Fundamental reason
Source research papers state that economic theory offers multiple explanations for the negative vol-of-vol effect; however, none can fully explain it. Research postulates that the equity options market contains information that is reflected later in stock prices and information defuses slowly into and across markets and the options market contributes to price discovery in the stock market.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks from NYSE. Closed-end funds, REITs, penny stocks (priced under $5) and stocks with a market capitalization lower than $225mln USD are excluded. Stocks are then sorted into quantiles based on market capitalization. The investor uses only the highest quantile of stocks (the most liquid and biggest stocks from the investment universe) in subsequent portfolio formation step.

OptionMetrics data are used to calculate the volatility of volatility for each stock. The average implied volatility of the ATM call option and ATM put option for the last 20 days is used to calculate the volatility of volatility. This measure is then scaled by the standard deviation of implied volatility (see exact methodology on page 7 of source academic paper).

Each month, stocks are sorted into quintiles based on the volatility of volatility ratio. The investor buys stocks with the lowest volatility of volatility ratio and sells stocks with the highest ratio. Stocks in the portfolio are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Source and related research papers don’t offer exact insight into correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. However, picture 1 shows strategy’s performance over time (with negative sign) which confirms our suspicion that strategy is comparable to classical low volatility factor (the best performance is during bad years for equities – 2001, 2002 etc.). Therefore it means that strategy can be probably used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is also built as a long-short so that it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.