One of the most basic principles in the finance assumes that investor who takes higher risks should be rewarded with a higher return. However, in 1972, the research from Robert Haugen and James Heins provided evidence, that this is not always the case and the market can be beaten by so-called ‘low volatility anomaly’. Using the history of stock returns between 1926 and 1969, they showed that portfolios investing systematically in the least volatile US stocks would have delivered much higher returns than could be expected from their low level of risk. On the other hand, it was shown that portfolios which invested in the most volatile stocks, would have underperformed in terms of risk-adjusted performance. This low volatility anomaly has since been reviewed and confirmed empirically by many other research studies.
One of the most recent research on the low volatility anomaly has been conducted by BNP Paribas Asset Management team, which has examined the low volatility strategy ten years ago. Now, the team has tried to review on the ten years of out-of-sample results, whether the anomaly sill holds and if it has not been arbitraged away. The key results of their research provided evidence that the least volatile stocks from every sector had a higher Sharpe ratio than those of their respective riskier peers. This indicates that the low volatility anomaly does not appear only in typically less volatile sectors such as utilities, consumer staples or healthcare, but low volatility anomaly can be observed in every sector. Therefore, investing in the least volatile stocks from all sectors adds not only the diversification but also delivers higher risk-adjusted returns compared to a portfolio, that is strongly biased towards the least volatile sectors. Furthermore, a strategy that diversifies by investing in the least volatile stocks of all sectors can more easily avoid being over-exposed to business cycle rotation in sector returns.
This implies that the least volatile stocks from each sector appear to be equally good candidates for a low volatility portfolio, which is built to bring higher risk-adjusted returns than achieved by the market capitalisation index used to benchmark the strategy. The proposed strategy, therefore, invests equally into the decile of least volatile stocks from all existing sectors. Rebalancing monthly, this strategy would earn an annual return of 6,96% with 12,55% yearly volatility from 01/2011 to 06/2020.

Fundamental reason
The authors consider five misconceptions in the assumptions behind the basic financial theory, that could lead to the low volatility anomaly. Firstly, the investors face numerous constraints when investing, such as on the amount of leverage they may use or how much they can rely on short-selling techniques to arbitrage pricing anomalies. Secondly, many investors do not actually seek to maximise absolute returns and reduce volatility. Thirdly, the assumptions that investors face no transaction costs or taxes, and that markets are perfectly divisible and perfectly liquid are incorrect. Fourthly, not all investors have the same investment horizon. And finally, the vast majority of investors is affected by cognitive biases, such as those relating to representativeness, overconfidence or a preference for lotteries.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of MSCI World index stocks. For each sector, the investor calculates the volatility of the stocks over the preceding three years. Then, the investor goes long on decile of least volatile stocks from the respective sector. The portfolio is equally-weighted among all ten sectors. Also, the stocks picked from the same respective sector are equally-weighted. The portfolio is rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Its a long-only equity strategy.