Usually, two simple strategies can form one composite one with superior performance. Recent academic research has shown that the two strongest groups of anomalies are the investment and momentum anomalies (out of momentum, value-versus-growth, investment, profitability, intangibles and trading frictions). Therefore, combining investment and momentum is likely to generate superior performance by taking advantage of the two most prominent dimensions of market inefficiency/mispricing that is recognized by the academic world. Momentum strategies are based on the tendency of the stocks that have performed well to continue performing in such way and on the other hand, stocks that have performed badly are expected to continue to perform badly. Investment anomaly is connected with a simple idea that firms that overinvest are overpriced and moreover, research implies that a firm’s level of investment could serve as a partial indication of its (mis)valuation. Clearly, if the mispricing indicated by investment is fully captured by the price momentum, then the investment should have no added value to momentum. However, that is not the case with this combination and the Investment-Momentum strategy consisting of buying past winners with low investments and selling past losers with high investments outperforms both simple strategies. Moreover, the strategy is not only stronger but also more persistent than either the momentum or investment strategy.

Fundamental reason
Both momentum and investment are well-known factors in financial literature. Momentum is connected with the behavioural biases like investor herding, investor over and underreaction, and lastly, with the confirmation bias. Moving into investment factor, past research has proved that the conservative investment portfolio is connected with greater returns compared to an aggressive investment portfolio. To explain it briefly, aggressive investments do not improve returns in the near future and yet, it is questioned if those investments would improve returns in the future at all. The functionality is deeply connected with the aim of the authors not to find another enhanced momentum strategy based on identifying any new fundamentals or combining them together, but to show that market inefficiency/mispricing has many dimensions that can be exploited jointly. As this research suggests, one can simultaneously condition on multiple dimensions of market inefficiency to profit from future stock returns.
Additionally, when the momentum or investment strategy exhibits insignificant performance during the later stage of the sample in the paper (2000-2015), the combined investment-momentum strategy still produces persistent results. Therefore, the investment momentum strategy is both stronger and more persistent than either the momentum or investment strategy. Last but not least, this strong performance is present also in the universe of stocks with a low bid-ask spread.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks (share codes 10 and 11) traded on the NYSE and AMEX. Stocks priced less than $5 at the beginning of the holding period are excluded.

Firstly, sort the stocks equally into three groups based on the bid-ask spread and from now on, consider only the lowest bid-ask spread group to ensure the liquidity. The composite investment-momentum (InvMom) strategy is constructed by combining past returns momentum and I/A ratios. Momentum is constructed for all stocks based on their past six month returns (from month -5 to month 0). The investment-to-assets (I/A) ratio is measured as the annual change in gross property, plant and equipment plus the annual change in inventories divided by the lagged book value of assets.

At the end of each month, stocks are independently sorted into quintiles based on their past six-month returns and their latest I/A ratios, respectively. This double-sorting produces 5×5 combinations of momentum and investment portfolios. The momentum-investment strategy takes a long position in the winner portfolio with low investment and a short position in the loser portfolio with high investment, and hold them for the next six months (from month 2 to month 7 – one most recent month is skipped). The strategy is equally weighted and rebalanced every six months.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.