The Adaptive market hypothesis (AMH) theory proposes that the efficiency and inefficiency of financial markets can coexist. The degree of market efficiency and profitability of investment strategies fluctuates due to market rivalry, technology innovations, different types of market players, and more. The main practical argument of AMH is that effective trading techniques should be used on a timely basis, as return opportunities change with time. Furthermore, contrarian investing is defined as an investment strategy in which investors intentionally sell when others are buying and purchase when most investors are selling. In other words, they invest exactly the opposite of the market trends and bet on mean-reversion.
Novel research shows that the raw and risk-adjusted returns of contrarian strategy in the Indian stock market are time-varying. The reseason is that the different price and volatility stages are connected with the local market environment and the specific nature of local investors. As a result, it plays a significant role in the return dynamics of not only the Indian market but also other South Asian emerging markets. The connection between the return dynamics of contrarian investors and time-varying market conditions supports and, to some extent, explains AMH. However, from the practitioner´s point of view, the contrarian strategy based on the past 12-months is connected with a significant reversal and not momentum as in the developed markets.
Fundamental reason
The link between contrarian payoffs and stock market circumstances is the fundamental rationale for the strategy’s effectiveness. Contrarian payoffs are mostly derived from the market state element. Changes in stock market circumstances greatly impact contrarian earnings, and the reversal returns are more substantial during negative market states and high volatility or crisis periods.
Even after accounting for the influence of recognized risk variables, the association between contrarian profitability and changing market circumstances remains. Furthermore, the key cause for time-dependent market efficiency in the form of larger returns on stock market anomalies is changing market circumstances. Investors in developing markets, such as India, are unable to adapt to changing market conditions, according to this study. As a result, contrarian return possibilities often appear over time, and these markets have persistent weak-form market inefficiencies.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks traded on the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE), excluding all inconsistent and small stocks. The monthly data are obtained from Thomson and Reuters DataStream. The primary variable of interest is the cumulative average return (CAR), defined as the sum of the returns of the particular stocks during the 12 months from (t–12) to (t–1). At the end of the month (t), sort all stocks into three portfolios- winner, loser, or none. The winner portfolio consists of stocks with the prior 12-month CARs in the top 20%. The loser portfolio consists of stocks with the prior 12-month CARs in the bottom 20%. Long the loser portfolio and short the winner portfolio. The strategy is equally weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - According to the paper, the strategy is even more profitable during bad market states and crises (Table 3 and 5).