China has the world’s second-largest stock market, helping to finance economy that some predict will be the world’s largest within a decade. China also has political and economic environments quite different from those in the US and other developed economies. Moreover, China’s market and investors are separated from the rest of the world. China largely prohibits participation by foreign investors in its domestic stock market as well as participation by its domestic investors in foreign markets.
In this paper, authors explore and develop factor models in China, allowing its unique environment to dictate alternative approaches. Size and value are the most prominent characteristics used by many institutions to classify investment styles. The most widely used nonmarket factors in academic research are also size and value. This study reveals that size and value effects are important in China but with properties different from the US. Three-factor model, CH-3, is constructed, including the market factor as well as size and value factors incorporating the above China-special elements. An alternative three-factor model, FF-3, is constructed as well, by simply replicating the Fama and French (1993) procedure. After the examination, it is found that CH-3 strongly dominates FF-3. The reason is that the FF-3 model cannot price the CH-3 size and value factors. Overall, CH-3 performs well as a factor model in China, and it captures the most documented anomalies. This strategy is related to the size factor, but the value factor is also included in our screener. The size factor construction is the same as in the other markets.

Fundamental reason
The size factor is intended to capture size-related differences in stock risk and return that arise from size-related differences in the underlying businesses. In China, however, the stock of a small listed firm is typically priced to reflect a substantial component of value related not to the firm’s underlying business but instead to the Chinese initial public offering (IPO) process. In China, the IPO market is strictly regulated, and the growing demand for public listing confronts the low processing capacity of the regulatory bureau to approve IPOs. As a consequence, private firms seeks an alternative approach, a reverse merger, to become public promptly. In a reverse merger, a private firm targets a publicly-traded company, a so-called shell, and gains control rights by acquiring its shares. While reverse mergers occur elsewhere, IPO constraints are sufficiently tight in China such that the smallest firms on the major exchanges become attractive shell targets, unlike in the US, for example. Therefore, the smallest 30% of stocks are eliminated. Otherwise, the logic of the strategy is in line with its US (or other non-US developed markets) equivalents.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese stocks with common shares from Wind Information Inc. (WIND). Firstly, eliminate the smallest 30% of stocks. Each month separates the remaining 70% of stocks into two size groups, small (S) and big (B), split at the median market value of that universe. Break that universe into three EP groups: top 30% (value, V), middle 40% (middle, M), and bottom 30% (growth, G). Then use the intersections of those groups to form value-weighted portfolios for the six resulting size-EP combinations: S/V, S/M, S/G, B/V, B/M, and B/G. When forming value-weighted portfolios, weight each stock by the market capitalization of all its outstanding A shares, including nontradable shares. Finally, combine the returns on these six portfolios as follows: the sum of B/V, B/M, and B/G divided by three subtracted from the sum of S/M, S/G, and S/V divided by three. Portfolios are value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - According to the paper, the SMB factor in China has a low correlation to the market factor of 0.12.