According to the literature, convertible bonds are significantly underpriced when issued, and this underpricing is a part of arbitrage hedge fund returns. However, there seems to be another profitable activity connected with such bonds. The primary purchasers of new issues are the convertible bond arbitrageurs. This group is short selling the issuer’s stock as a part of hedging strategy. Focusing on the US market (EU is different) US convertible bonds are issued and priced based on stock prices on the end of the day. Usually, the upcoming issue is known in advance, and if short selling caused by arbitrage is more intense before the market close on pricing day, the related stock suffers large declines.
Moreover, the downward price pressure due to pricing day short-selling results in abnormally cheap embedded call option in the convertible bond. Additionally, the upcoming issue does not have to be known well in advance; the issue could be announced overnight. Still, in that case, the price of the stock would not be affected on pricing day since the market would be closed and therefore, such issue is not connected with short selling. As a result, such activity could not be exploited on pricing day, because there simply is no such activity. Additionally, the bonds could also be announced one day prior the pricing, and in that case, there is also a large decline of stock on pricing day (paper includes analysis of bonds marketed one day before), but we would centre our attention around bonds that are announced two or three days prior the pricing for the simplicity. Naturally, the aforementioned decline of stock prices could be easily utilized by shorting the stock during the pricing day to gain profit from such behaviour.

Fundamental reason
The paper documents significant declines in the stock prices of issuers on bond pricing days. According to this research, this could be caused by the price pressure due to hedging or stock price manipulation. Both options are not mutually exclusive, and they even might be complements. However, the paper states that regardless of the precise mechanism, convertible bonds are being issued at the wrong prices and that convertible bond arbitrageurs are able to benefit from such situation. Most importantly, a convertible bond arbitrageur would have little incentive to limit the short-selling intensity out of fear of downward stock price pressure prior to bond pricing, because such pressure is worth for arbitrageur since there are profits from an abnormally low strike price in the option embedded in the bond. Such short-selling and downward price pressure cause temporarily inefficient stock prices and also a potential wealth transfer from issuing firms to the buyers of convertible bonds. Therefore, to utilize the downward stock price pressure, there seems to be profitable to short the stock as arbitrageurs do.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks of firms with convertible bonds that were more than 1-day marketed. Firms with historical stock prices of less than $5/share are excluded. The trading strategy is simple, since there is a large decline of stock price during price day of the convertible bond, hold the short position during pricing day of the bond.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The short-selling strategy is a natural hedge/diversification to equity market factor during bear markets.