ESG has received a continuously rising attention and it has a significant impact on the financial markets. One of the ESG issues concerned on this study is the climate policy uncertainty (CUP). Normally, investors tend to pay higher prices for stocks which have high exposure to CPU betas in order to earn positive expected returns during the period of an increased uncertainty in climate policy. However, according to the study, there exists an inverse climate policy uncertainty premium i.e., stocks with higher exposure to CPU betas earn lower expected returns.

Novel research shows that paying high prices for stocks, which are highly exposed to CPU betas, does not hedge the climate policy risk. On the contrary, these stocks are expensive, riskier and they earn significantly lower future returns. This clearly contradicts to the standard risk premium hypothesis and previous studies, where stocks with high exposure to CPU betas earn significantly higher future returns. On average, low CPU beta (green) stocks are value firms with low crash price risk, low growth potential, weak price return momentum, and vice versa. Moreover, low CPU beta stocks lean more towards the Democrats whereas high CPU beta stocks tend to affiliate more with the Republicans. Furthermore, the novel research confirms that the growth, crash risk, momentum attributes and other firm characteristics do not explain away the anomalous inverse CPU premium. Therefore, the authors perform bivariate portfolio sorts and run cross-sectional panel regressions for an individual stock return after controlling for firm characteristics. The results of these analyses corroborate the negative relationship between CPU betas and future returns.

Naturally, such a result can be a base of the trading strategy which sorts low CPU beta stocks in the top decile with a long position and high CPU beta stocks in the bottom decile with a short position, creating a zero-investment portfolio.

Fundamental reason
The fundamental reason for the functionality of the strategy is the framework of ICAPM model (Merton, 1973). In the Merton’s world uncertainty-averse investors require premium for holding low CPU beta stocks, resulting these stocks in higher future equity returns. At the same time, these investors are willing to pay a little more for high CPU beta stocks, considered as hedging assets, and these stocks underperform with low future returns. Moreover, the inverse CPU premium is not explained even after controlling for firm characteristics (size, B/M ratio, price crash risk and market movements). The abnormal returns of the strategy are statistically significant, and they are not spanned by any Fama-French factor model.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all AMEX, NYSE, and NASDAQ stocks with share codes 10 and 11, extracted from CRSP database. Stocks with a price per share less than $2 or more than $1000 and stocks with market capitalization less than $5 million are removed. Also, stocks with monthly returns above 100% are removed as well. The CPU index is obtained from the website www.policyuncertainty.com. The key metric of climate policy uncertainty (CPU) is the monthly CPU news-based index of Gavriilidis (2021). The sample period for the CPU index covers from January 2000 to December 2020. The accounting data such as book value are obtained from the merged CRSP-Compustat database. Fama-French factors returns are collected from Kenneth French’s online data library.
The simple trading strategy is constructed as followed. In order to obtain CPU beta of each stock (i), the 60-month rolling regression is performed. The monthly excess return on each stock (i) is regressed on the CPU index, excess market return, three factor returns (SMB,HML and UMD) and liquidity factor, all independent variables are monthly based (page 8, equation 1). Afterwards, we sort stocks based on estimated CPU betas into deciles. Low CPU beta stocks are in the top decile whereas high CPU beta stocks are in the bottom decile. The zero-investment portfolio is constructed by long the top decile and short the bottom decile. All portfolios are value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - against the overall market. Green assets have a higher price and a lower expected return than brown assets because of investors’ higher demand for green assets in order to hedge climate risk.