Machine learning (ML) methods are becoming more and more popular everywhere, and data science is booming. The financial world certainly is not an exception. Novel research aims to construct an intraday trading strategy that predicts stock prices of S&P500 constituents based on past prices only. The paper employs two approaches: Long short-term memory (LSTM) artificial recurrent neural network and Random forests.
It could be said that the aim is to improve a single-feature setting in Fischer & Krauss (2018) and Krauss et al. (2017). Both papers use only daily returns with respect to the closing prices. The idea is to add more features. Therefore the algorithms use intra-day returns, returns with respect to last closing price and returns with respect to the opening price. Features are standardized using Robust Scaler standardization. The LSTM outperforms the random forests. As a result, we would centre our attention to this technique. The model is inputted with 240 timesteps and three features and is trained to predict the direction of the 241st intraday return.
Overall, the strategy is highly profitable; however, in the most recent period, it is becoming unprofitable. Therefore, the idea requires a slight enhancement or additional backtest to ensure that it would be a valuable addition to a portfolio.

Fundamental reason
As always with Machine learning based strategies, the fundamental reason is not that straightforward. Many consider ML methods as black boxes that are able to “do the work”, while nobody sees the process. Therefore, the selection of stocks might not be interpretable using plain language. However, the algorithms use large datasets, can learn from mistakes and are less prone to overfitting.
Compared to other similar papers, this research, even more, expands the size of the dataset by using more features. Therefore, we can conclude that this is the main reason for the functionality. More improvements could be probably made by using even more features or using the idea in a combined complex strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P500 constituents. The algorithm was trained using a 4-year window and 1-year stride. Each study period is divided into a training set of approximately 756 days (3 years) and a trading set of approximately 252 days (1 year). Firstly the features are intra-day returns, returns with respect to last closing price and returns with respect to opening price (mathematical definitions are in section 3.2.1). Features are standardized using Robust Scaler standardization, which removes the median and then scales the data using the inter-quantile range. The process makes data robust to outliers. Nextly, generate overlapping sequences of 240 consecutive, three-dimensional standardized features. The aim is to predict the direction of the 241st intraday return, using LSTM and standardized features. Model specification of LSTM used in the paper is in section 3.4.2. Stocks are divided into two classes of equal size, based on their intraday returns. At time t, the stock is assigned into class 0 if the realized intraday return of the stock is smaller than the cross-sectional median of intraday returns of all stocks at time t. Stock is assigned into class 1 if the realized intraday return of the stock is bigger than the cross-sectional median of intraday returns of all stocks at time t. Finally, forecast the probability P for each stock to outperform the median intraday return. Long top 10 stocks with the highest probability and short bottom ten stocks with the lowest probability. The strategy is rebalanced intraday and equally-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on portfolio simulations in Figure 1, the strategy should work during crises.