Academic research contains a lot of evidence about the predictability of the mean and volatility of equity returns. A key question is whether the Sharpe Ratio, which is calculated from the mean and volatility, is a preferable predictor to the individual mean and volatility ratios. The source academic research paper uses several different approaches to predict the future Sharpe ratio of equity markets; several different predictors could be used (dividend+repurchase yield, lagged volatility, Baa-Aaa spread, commercial paper – treasury spread, etc.) and individual parts of the ratio could be predicted separately or jointly. Each methodology has successful predictions, and the predicted Sharpe ratios could, therefore, be used as an input into a market timing strategy.

Fundamental reason
The academic paper postulates two theories to explain the Sharpe ratio predictability. First, predictability could be a product of fluctuations in consumer sentiment associated with business cycle fluctuations. At the peak of the cycle, over-optimistic investors could be overpricing stocks, leading to poor future tradeoffs between risk and return, with the reverse happening at the trough of the cycle. Second, the empirical results could be due to rational, but not perfectly correlated, time-variation in the conditional moments of returns (if aggregate risk aversion changes over the cycle, decreasing during expansions and increasing during recessions).

Simple trading strategy
The strategy estimates the conditional Sharpe ratio by using a 10-year rolling regression and compares this number to a fixed threshold. Each month, two regression equations are used: one to estimate the mean and one to estimate volatility. The independent variables in the regression equations (as an example) are the dividend + repurchase yields; however, many other predictors could be used (see the source paper for additional details). The estimated ratios are then used to calculate the predicted Sharpe ratio. If the estimated conditional Sharpe ratio is larger than the threshold (0.2), then invest in the stock market; if it is smaller, then invest in a risk-free asset.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The selected strategy is a class of “Market Timing” strategies which try to rotate out of equities during the time of stress. Therefore, the proposed strategy isn’t mainly used as an add-on to the portfolio to hedge equity risk directly, but it is more an overlay which can be used to manage the percentual representation of equities (or “equity-like assets”) in a portfolio. “Equity Market Timing” strategy can decrease the overall risk of equities in a portfolio, and it can improve the risk-adjusted returns. Moreover, as strategy’s goal is to hold equity market only in positive times for equity market factor and be out of equities otherwise, therefore this logic might be used to create amended market timing strategy (using original rules) which is out of equities during positive times and holds bonds (or goes short equities) during bad times. This new amended strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. However, performance/risk characteristics and overall correlation and quality of suggested amended strategy can be found out only by rigorous backtest and source academic research paper doesn’t give us any clues on how it will perform…