Past research has shown that alpha is a powerful predictor of future stock returns. While a short-term alpha is positively correlated with future payoffs – the higher the alpha, the better the future performance. In the finance world also exists the reversal “betting against alpha” strategy, implying that the stocks with high long-term alpha underperform those with low long-term alpha.

The recently documented alpha based return patterns discovered for stocks in novel research has explored whether the alpha anomalies also exist for countries and industries. This research has shown that both the long-term and short-term alphas offer a very effective return predictive variable which could be used for international asset allocation strategies across countries and industries. To be more precise, the research recognizes two distinct anomalies, the alpha momentum, which is the alpha derived from a 12-month trailing estimation period and the alpha reversal, which is the alpha derived from the 60-month period with the 12 most recent months skipped in order to avoid the overlap with the momentum signal. The investor can choose from both country and sector indexes, however, the sector indexes are impractical. The value-weighted reversal strategy is not significant, so from now on, we would deal only with the country alpha momentum strategy (however, more detailed information about the aforementioned strategies can be found in the source paper). The country alpha momentum strategy is both statistically and economically significant with a simple execution based on the CAPM model and scaled alphas by the volatility.

Fundamental reason
According to the authors, the intuition behind using alpha-based strategies can be explained as the following. Both standard momentum and reversal strategies are subject to systematic risk, and various factor risks can drive an important portion of the returns attributed to these strategies. Therefore, the employment of a trading strategy that is based on momentum and reversal signals which are based on alphas adjusts the past returns for risk. Naturally, the alpha based strategies, in consequence, disentangles the momentum and reversal effects from the effects of risk factors. Moreover, an alpha-based strategy diverges from its standard counterpart in the sense that it benefits from mispricing in assets by taking a long position in undervalued assets with positive alphas and a short position in overvalued ones with negative alphas. Additionally, the research has proved that the alpha momentum, in particular, is a powerful return pattern, being robust to many considerations.
Most importantly, from the practical point of view, the alpha momentum is robust to impact of trading costs, nextly also to alternative holding periods, different portfolio weighting methods, or application in various subperiods and subsamples, including both developed and emerging equities. Interestingly, in nearly all variants and specifications of tests that have been made, the alpha momentum fully explains the price momentum. However, on the other hand, the price momentum does not explain the alpha momentum. Last but not least, the results support the behavioural explanation of the alpha momentum in international equity markets. The behavioural explanation of equity anomalies indicates that they result from investor irrationality that cannot be easily arbitraged away.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 51 country indexes. Start with the computation of alphas using the traditional simple CAPM model (equation 1, page 13). Nextly, obtain the alpha score – scale the alphas from the CAPM model by the volatility of returns (volatility is computed as a standard deviation – or see equation 5, page 14). The alpha momentum in month t is measured as the volatility-adjusted alpha estimated during months t-12 to t-1. Lastly, rank the indexes according to their alpha score, long the highest quintile and short the lowest quintile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly (the paper also test the equally-weighted strategy).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.