Overall consumption is a composite of the consumption of basic and discretionary goods. Consumption of discretionary goods is connected with households which have higher wealth levels, and this consumption clearly is not essential. On the other hand, basic goods are always needed for households with various incomes, and research shows that this type of consumption is not associated with stock returns. However, it was proved that discretionary consumption is associated with stock returns, which favours the usage of discretionary consumption over overall consumption or consumption of basic goods to predict stock returns. Novel and quite simple way how to determine the discretionary consumption is to track the daily theatrical box office earnings. Research proved that even after controlling for macroeconomic indicators, changes in the box office earnings are positively associated with contemporaneous returns of stocks. Moreover, predictions based on the changes in the box office earnings are statistically significant, which leads to defining a simple but profitable investment strategy based on those predictions. Unfortunately, the paper includes two methodological mistakes. Both definitions of changes in the box office earnings are using data which are not known at the time of constructing the strategy, so the strategy needs some corrections to be applicable.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, visiting movie theatres surely is not an essential activity, and it is connected with discretionary consumption. Secondly, as a proxy for discretionary consumption, the proxy must be attributed to a large part of the population. Since 71% of the U.S. population (approximately 81% of them are adults) visited a movie theatre at least once in the year 2016, this condition is also satisfied. Lastly, the data of the earnings are publicly and easily accessible. Aforementioned implicates that the box office earnings are a valid proxy for discretionary consumption. Research proved that box office earning are positively associated with GDP growth and disposable income.
On the other hand, increased box office earnings are not connected with consumer loans or personal debts, so tracked changes show the variation in the consumption rather than variation in the borrowed money. Moreover, the earnings are also positively associated with returns of the industry portfolios, so results are not due to industry differences. However, changes in the box office earnings can predict stock returns only up to 4 days, so investing strategy requires high turnover.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of CRSP equally-weighted index (S&P500 Index investment vehicle can be used too). Firstly, data needed for the box office earnings are obtained from the Box Office Mojo. Secondly, calculate the change in the daily box office earnings over a season average (consider five movie seasons in every given year: winter, spring, summer, fall and holiday season). Change in the box office earnings (Changebox) is equal to the difference between the total daily box office earnings of all movies on day d (Monday-Friday) and the same day season’s average, divided by the same day season’s average. However, because the investor does not have the future data of season earnings, for a practical application of the strategy, it would be wiser to use the Change box defined as the difference of the total daily box office earnings on day d minus the total daily box office earnings at day d-7 divided by the total daily box office earnings at day d-7. According to the authors, the returns should be similar. Go long stocks at the end of day d if the growth in change box is greater than 15% and go short otherwise.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy is timing equity market, but traders can split this strategy into two halves and use a short-only part of this strategy. After a careful backtest, this short-only strategy might be used as a hedge/diversification during market/economic crises.