Value and momentum effects are two well-known anomalies. Performance of both anomalies vary over time, and they are usually fairly independent. Both anomalies have different sensitivity to the business cycle and overall economic situation. Therefore it is advantageous to rotate between both effects on a systematic way to exploit the “currently better anomaly”.

Fundamental reason
Research states that the two prominent investment styles in the global equity market (the value effect and the momentum effect) are closely related to investor sentiment, which in turn is driven by the state of the economy. Towards the peak of the economic cycle, investors tend to be over-optimistic regarding stocks with superior recent performance and neglect stocks that temporary underperform. This phenomenon leads momentum stocks to outperform value stocks prior to the market peak, and the reversal is likely to occur in the subsequent market corrections. This characteristic could be used in a timing strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of global equities. Two portfolios are created out of these stocks each month – value and momentum portfolios. Exact methodology to form value/momentum portfolios is explained in Hsieh, Hodnett second paper (link in a “Related Research”) however classical methodologies could be probably easily used too (momentum portfolio consists of stocks with the highest 6-12 month return and value portfolio consists of stocks with the highest E/P ratios).

The overall investment portfolio consists of 3 parts – value, momentum and cash (invested in T-Bills) part. The weighted least squares (WLS) technique is used in the next step. A series of rolling 36-month (month t-36 through month t) WLS regressions are performed monthly to calculate optimal weights for value, momentum and cash component of a portfolio (investor is optimizing to have the highest Sharpe ratio). The optimal style allocations estimated by WLS regressions are subsequently employed to perform style allocations for the next month. The calculation is performed monthly, and the whole portfolio is rebalanced accordingly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The selected strategy is a class of “Market Timing” strategies which try to rotate out of equities during the time of stress. Therefore the proposed strategy isn’t mainly used as an add-on to the portfolio to hedge equity risk directly. Still, it is more an overlay which can be used to manage the percentual representation of equities (or “equity-like assets”) in a portfolio. “Equity Market Timing” strategy can decrease the overall risk of equities in a portfolio, and it can improve the risk-adjusted returns. Moreover, as strategy’s goal is to hold the equity market only in positive times for equity market factor and be out of equities otherwise. Therefore this logic might be used to create amended market timing strategy (using original rules) which is out of equities during positive times and holds bonds (or goes short equities) during bad times. This new amended strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. However, performance/risk characteristics and overall correlation and quality of suggested amended strategy can be found out only by rigorous backtest and source academic research paper doesn’t give us any clues on how it will perform…