Every stock market is somewhat different. China’s stock market is attractive in many ways, mainly because China is one of the largest emerging economies globally with great market value. Investors there tend to behave significantly differently from those, for example, in the US. That is caused by China’s large number of retail investors, who are non-professional individuals trading differently from institutional investors. That is the reason why studying behavioural finance might help build interesting strategies in this market.
Many studies of behaviour finance in relation to asset pricing have been published in recent years. However, most of them tend to focus on the US market. Because of the nature of China’s stock markets, the reason why the authors decide to study the relationship between behaviour and asset price is apparent. The investors in China’s A-share stock market tend to overreact to news, which, if captured, could help pinpoint overvalued stocks to short. Because ‘overvalue’ itself is almost impossible to capture, the authors propose five different proxies based on other published research to approximate this value and calculate a score for a given stock. Based on this score, a portfolio can be sorted, allowing the trader to short the most overvalued and buy the most undervalued stocks.

Fundamental reason
The main reason behind this strategy’s functionality is mispricing. Unlike the US and some other world markets, China’s stock market is dominated mainly by retail investors. According to behavioural finance, individuals often trade differently from institutions, acting with systematic biases, which give rise to anomalies like overreaction and underreaction to the news on the market. Moreover, many investors in China tend to treat the stock market as a gambling site. As a result, they react to information about companies in completely disproportionate ways, often overreacting to the news, causing stock overpricing.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of China A-Share stocks from Shanghai (SSE) and Shenzen (SZSE) exchanges. Stocks under special treatment (ST stocks), stocks that went public within 12 months before sorting, and stocks whose trading has been suspended and stayed at the limit up for the whole day of the calculation day are excluded. For calculation of the sorting score, we use the following proxy variables: Book-to-Market ratio, Short-term reversal, Idiosyncratic volatility, MAX, and Abnormal turnover (see table 1, panel A on page 6). To calculate the overreaction score, do the following:
For each anomaly variable, adjust the sign so the correlation with returns is positive. Turn variable value into a rank – a higher value means a higher rank. As the final overreaction score take the averaged ranking of those 5 anomaly variables.
Sort stocks into deciles according to this score. Long the highest-ranking decile, short the lowest (high overreaction is correlated with negative future returns). The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Note: We use US stocks as our investment universe in our out-of-sample test as we do not have data for Chinese A-shares stocks.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include enough information to be sure about any possible uses as a hedge.