Climate change has been threatening people for decades. However, in recent years many scientists are warning society that damage has been done, and if we are not going to start supporting environmental regulations and policies, the damage will be irreversible. The finance world could play a crucial role in achieving a reduction of unsustainable high-emission firms. Strategies towards environmentally friendly and sustainable investing are emerging, intending to have a positive social impact.
This paper performs a sentimental analysis on StockTwits (social media platform with the same characteristics as Twitter, such as short posts with a maximum of 140 characters, for investors) posts relating to climate changes and global warming. The investors’ climate sentiment is measured via R package sentimentr (Rinker, 2019), which calculates a very precisely and quickly a tex sentiment polarity. The findings suggest that devastating natural disasters and global strikes are increasing climate sentiment. We can expect that emission-free stocks will outperform the high-emission stocks. However, when climate sentiment is increased, the emission stocks outperform the emission-free stocks since it causes an undervaluation of emission stocks and an overvaluation of emission-free (clean) stocks. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) defines stock as a high-emission (carbon-intensive) stock if it belongs to one of the carbon-intesive industry sectors, others as clean stocks.
Additionally, carbon prices are lower when an environmental policy has been introduced. Implying that if investors are aware of the current climate crisis when making decisions, the price of carbon increases, which should lead to a decrease in carbon emissions by firms. Lastly, it is a well-known fact that EMC (Emission-minus-Clean portfolio) portfolios generate null returns. However, as a result of previous findings, the authors construct a profitable strategy that essentially is the EMC timing strategy.

Fundamental reason
Similar research had been done in the past when the authors analyzed posts about climate change and global warming on Twitter about high emission firms and stock markets. However, the dataset was huge, noisy, and not completely relevant. Due that the main reason for choosing the StockTwits platform over Twitter is that the content is exclusively made by investors.
The main reasons for the functionality of the strategy are the behavior of investors and timing. The sentimental behavior towards climate change, global warming, global environmental disasters, and other related topics move prices of high emission and emission-free firms stocks. Particularly, when there is a higher climate sentiment, the high emission stocks tend to be undervalued and emission-free stocks overvalued. Therefore, the higher climate sentiment, the higher mispricing of the EMC portfolio. Consequently, this mispricing leads to positive returns. Looking closely at the strategy, the authors divide stocks into high emission stocks and clean stocks. However, considering that stocks categorized as clean stocks does not necessarily mean that firms have zero emissions (“clean” stocks are not from carbon-intensive industry sectors). Therefore, the strategy mostly times the position in the high emission stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the Thomson Reuters Datastream (stocks traded on NYSE and NASDAQ). Firstly, the ICE-ECX Carbon Emission Allowances (EUA) – log of settlement price for futures are used for carbon prices. Secondly, the investors’ climate sentiment is measured via R package sentimentr (Rinker, 2019) based on StockTwits. The strategy is based on investors’ climate sentiment and carbon prices. Firstly, construct the EMC portfolio. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) defines stock as a high-emission (carbon-intensive) stock if it belongs to Energy, Transport, Buildings, Industry (chemicals and metals), Agriculture, Forestry, or Other Land Use (AFOLU). Others are defined as clean stocks. The EMC portfolio consists of a long position in a value-weighted portfolio of emission stocks and a short position in a value-weighted portfolio of clean stocks. Each month, if the sign for climate sentiment change is positive and negative for carbon prices, buy the EMC portfolio. When the investors’ climate sentiment change is negative, and carbon price change is positive, short the EMC portfolio. Lastly, if climate sentiment and carbon price changes have the same sign, the outcome is not clear, and therefore, invest rather in risk-free security. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The history of the strategy is too short and do not include any major crisis.