Authors develop a novel market sentiment indicator termed TA sentiment, where they apply a spectrum of technical trading rules to a market index (such as the S&P 500), which may be applied to any arbitrary selection of stocks in a formed portfolio based on any rule (e.g., fundamental information about a company, etc.). This new TA sentiment indicator correlates strongly with other commonly used sentiment indicators. An increase in this TA sentiment indicator is accompanied by high near-term returns and subsequent low returns in the cross-section, and this is the basis for our meta-strategy, which shows an average of performance based on applying TA sentiment on all considered fundamental variables about companies listed on U.S. markets.

Fundamental reason
This paper argues, as many practitioners do, that technical analysis has its merits through its role as a barometer of investor sentiment. Baker and Wurgler (2006) argue that stocks differ in their exposure to market-wide sentiment and hence sentiment affects the cross-section of stock returns. Scientists from the paper also test the cross-sectional pricing effect of our TA sentiment. Furthermore, when rational arbitrageurs have a synchronization problem (Abreu and Brunnermeier 2002; 2003) in the presence of sentiment, they delay arbitrage and ride mispricing until a coordinated arbitrage is triggered. Therefore, due to delayed arbitrage, one should expect sentiment-prone stocks to generate higher short-term returns than their sentiment-resistant counterparts. It is reasonable to expect these returns to reverse over the longer term when sentiment decays and a coordinated attack occurs. It is profitable to delay arbitrage by devising a trading strategy that captures the momentum effect of TA sentiment, too. The authors successfully demonstrate that riding the TA sentiment can result in substantial profits and has significant market timing power. Unlike prior literature, which tests the profitability of technical analysis with single stocks or the overall market, they show that applying technical analysis to a market index while trading in the cross-section generates substantial profits as well.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe comprises all common stocks (share codes 10 and 11) in NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ.
(Stock market data from CRSP. Firm-level accounting data is obtained from Compustat.)

0. a. Detailed definitions of the firm characteristics and the long-short portfolios are provided in 3.2 Portfolios (pgs. 17, 18, 19).
0. b. TA sentiment calculation is described in 3.1 TA Sentiment Indicator: Consider 2127 trading rules; each trading rule generates a buy/sell/neutral recommendation for the next day at the end of each day; assign values of 1, 0, and -1 to each buy, neutral, and sell signal, respectively; finally: each day, compute the equal-weighted average of trading signals across all 2127 strategies to obtain a time series, which then use as TA sentiment index.
1. The 16 firm characteristics are used to sort stocks into deciles.
2. The 16 original portfolios are constructed in a way that longs the most sentiment-prone decile portfolio and shorts the least sentiment-prone portfolio.
3. TA sentiment timing strategy is to hold the original portfolio when current TA sentiment is no less than the average TA sentiment over the prior ten trading days and to short the original portfolio otherwise.
The basic rule of TA timing strategy is straightforward: a buy (sell) signal is generated when a TA sentiment at the end of the current trading day is higher (lower) than the moving average of TA sentiment over the previous ten days.
When we apply the trading strategy to the original sixteen long-short portfolios, we long or continue to hold the original long-short portfolios the next day when a buy signal is generated and short the original long-short portfolio the next day when a sell signal is generated. For example, for the Age-sorted portfolio, our investment timing strategy is to long young firms and short old firms when the TA sentiment gives a buy signal and to long old firms and short young firms when the TA sentiment generates a sell signal.

(4.) We assume our strategy implementation to be equally weighted amongst the performance of all strategies (each performed strategy takes a proportional share of capital in the final portfolio).
The portfolios are rebalanced every year to allow stocks to shift from one portfolio to another.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include any information about the usage as a possible hedge.