There is probably not a more persistent and global anomaly than momentum. The momentum strategy has a simple idea that past returns have predictive power for returns in the future. As such, the strategy usually consists of buying past winners and past losers. The momentum is truly a widespread anomaly and was found in equities, equity indices, commodities, FX and even quantitative strategies. Although it contradicts the efficient market hypothesis, it is frequently explained by psychological biases.
Despite the abundance of literature on the momentum topic, the factor still attracts researchers. One strand of literature studies the possible momentum modifications, such as risk-adjusted momentum or momentum connected with other anomalies. The second strand of literature studies the existence of momentum in other (new) markets, such as emerging markets or novel cryptocurrency market. This novel research adds to the second strand of literature and examines both time-series and cross-sectional momentum in the Indian market. Additionally, the authors study many options regarding lookback and holding periods, and therefore the presented paper truly is a vital addition to the literature. This screener´s addition is related to the cross-sectional sector momentum with three days lookback period (short-term momentum). The strategy consists of individual strategies in each sector and their subsequent equal combination.

Fundamental reason
The momentum anomalies have strong support in academic literature across asset classes and markets as well. Traditionally, the explanations are behavioural-based and also this novel paper does not mention any new reasons why the momentum should work. The most common explanations include investor herding, investor over and underreaction, and lastly, confirmation bias. Some authors also offer risk-based explanations, which are built on the idea that assets performing the best in the recent period are in some sense riskier than their counterparts performing the worst. However, the strategy uses risk-adjusted returns.
To sum it up, the momentum is well-researched and widely accepted, and while this research paper does not offer any novel explanations, it shows the important practical results. The momentum anomalies (both long term and short term, cross-sectional and time-series) exist in the Indian market.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Indian stocks from 12 sectors (a complete list of stocks is in Appendix), where each sector is considered individually. For each stock in the individual sector, compute the 3-days risk-adjusted return. The cross-sectional momentum consists of buying, outperforming and shorting underperforming securities. The authors apply risk-budgeting to establish weights (page 6 for details). Total risk allocation is set to 15%, and the target risk of the allocation is 10%. For the intraday momentum, the authors do not suggest any optimization. According to the paper, the weights are scaled such that the risk is set to 15%, and the sum of weights is the scale of 100%. This strategy is applied to each sector individually, and then the sectors are equally weighted. The rebalancing period is 30 minutes.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The sample is too short to conclude anything from the equity curve in the paper and paper does not provide any additional information.