Stocks with the small probabilities to earn exceptionally high returns are well recognized by academics and called lottery stocks because of their properties. A widely used proxy for the lottery characteristic is the maximum daily return in the previous month. However, as common sense suggests, these stocks are overvalued and earn lower returns in the subsequent period. Therefore, the common lottery effect (MAX effect) strategy is to short stocks with the highest maximal daily return and long stocks with the lowest maximal daily return.
Perhaps the opposite effect should be observed in stocks sorted according to their lowest daily returns (MIN effect). The theory suggests that while for stocks with the highest max returns, investors overweigh the probability of large returns, for stocks with the lowest min returns, investors overweigh the probability of large losses. However, this should cause that such stocks are undervalued, leading to higher expected returns in the future. In practice, the theory does not seem to hold. The research has identified that the spread between the stocks with the lowest minimal daily returns and the highest minimal daily returns is small and statistically insignificant. The paper offers an explanation for the lack of the premium. On average, almost half of the stocks with the lowest minimal daily returns also have the highest maximal daily returns. Therefore, the stocks are attributed in both the extreme MAX and MIN deciles. Once the investors remove the top three lottery deciles, the MIN effect becomes highly profitable and statistically significant. It can identify true “losers” with subsequent reversals, which the paper describes as hot potato stocks – stocks that nobody wants to hold.
To sum it up, both the lottery effect and the hot potato effect are reasonable and profitable strategies. Additionally, both effects can be combined by going short the lottery stocks and long the hot potato stocks.

Fundamental reason
The majority of literature confirms that the lottery effect is caused by overreaction and outweighing the probability of extreme positive returns. However, the fact that the overreaction is not present in stocks with large daily losses is a puzzle. In theory, investors should overweigh the probability of large losses, which cause stocks to be undervalued. Additionally, the aforementioned should subsequently lead to a reversal and higher expected returns in the future. As it was previously mentioned, this is not the case in practice.
The reason is that, on average, almost half of the stocks with the lowest minimal daily returns also have the highest maximal daily returns. Moreover, on average, 78% of stocks ranked in the top MIN decile are also ranked in the top three MAX (lottery) deciles. This intersection weakens the theoretical assumptions of loser stocks that seemingly nobody wants to hold – the MIN or hot potato effect. Therefore, the solution is to drop the stocks that are also characterized as the lottery ones. The effect becomes highly significant, and the strategy successfully identifies the true hot potato stocks, which are traded below their fundamental value.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). Define MIN as the highest daily loss for each stock within each month and MAX as the largest daily gain. Firstly, sort stocks to the deciles based on their MAX.
Secondly, exclude stocks that are ranked in the top three MAX deciles. Nextly, sort remaining stocks into decile portfolios based on the values of MIN in ascending order. The MIN values are multiplied by minus one to ensure that the top decile includes the stocks with the largest negative daily returns over the past month, and the bottom decile includes the stocks with the lowest negative daily loss over the past month. The strategy takes a long position in the top MIN decile from the reduced sample (hot potato stocks) and a short position in MAX stocks’ original top decile (lottery stocks). The strategy is rebalanced monthly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not give any information about the performance of MIN during downturns, but the lottery strategy is considered to be working during stressful times (see the strategy 117 – Lottery Effect in Stocks)