Researchers construct a new method of evaluating ETF loan fees by reconstructing ETF holdings and calculating the difference between average loan fees on the holdings and the ETFs. Using this method, they document that ETF loan fees are consistently above what would be expected based on the loan fees of their underlying constituents. To demonstrate the economic magnitude of this discrepancy in loan fees, they construct a trading strategy that relies on the difference in loan fees between ETFs, which track the same index. From within that presented several cross-ETF arbitrage strategies that capture the average max loan fee difference between two (spread) legs, we selected a conditional strategy in which an investor decides not to trade following a negatively profitable month.

Fundamental reason
Since the availability of the create/redeem mechanism for ETFs should link the loan fees of the ETFs’ constituents to the loan fee of the ETF itself, ETF loan fees are too high; unlike equities, where most stock-loan days have loan fees under 100 basis points, only about 1/3 of ETF loan fees are under 100 basis points. This is exploitable by sophisticated investors. The lack of liquidity in the non-favorite ETFs leads to low demand for those ETFs in general since all things being equal, investors, both long and short, prefer more liquidity to less. This leads to low ownership of the non-favorite ETFs in general and low holdings among institutional investors, which leads to a lack of loan supply and a higher loan fee. When testing the cross-sectional correlations between a dummy variable which captures whether an ETF is a short favorite, it is apparent that ETFs that are short favorites tend to have higher trading volume and trade at a higher premium relative to NAV. Specifically, the cross-ETF arbitrage strategy involves buying long (and lending) the ETF with the highest loan fee among ETFs, tracking an index, and shorting the ETF with the lowest loan fee. This strategy is persistently and strongly profitable, allowing investors to capture the loan fee difference between ETFs that track the same index.

Simple trading strategy
Apart from the presented and indicated variant, we advise investors wanting to replicate the strategy (for diversification and similar various reasons) to look also at the other ETF pairs by determining:
1. indices with at least 2 tracking ETFs with populated loan fees are included, and 2. satisfying condition that the number of shares lent, the number of shares available to be lent, and loan fee are at least 50% of which the ETF portfolios are matched between the equity lending database and the ETF Global constituent lists, and 3. while also variables are winsorized at the 95th percentile to limit outliers; these make it for final consideration into investment universe selection.
(Construction of the ETF-month panel is commenced with ETF Global and ETF Global Industry dataset data. Retrieve returns, prices, and dividend yields for ETFs and their constituent securities from CRSP and obtain data on institutional ownership from the Thomson Reuters 13F dataset.)

Strategy Execution: You can create a long-short portfolio by buying the long-leg ETF (the ETF with the higher loan fee, which is assumed to be lent out) and selling (shorting) the short-leg ETF (the ETF with the lower loan fee). (In presented LT01TRUU (the Bloomberg US Treasury: 1-3 Year Total Return Index) Most Common Short Leg ETF is SHY, and Most Common Long Leg ETF is SCHO.)

The portfolio will be rebalanced each month and weighted equally (50 %) on both legs of the index.

Side note: Annual profitability and Sharpe ratios to the arbitrage strategies depend on the following practical scenarios (which may prevent or obstruct its actual execution due to regulatory constraints): 1) no restrictions, and 2) restricting the investor’s ability to lend the long-leg ETF by the ETF’s utilization ratio.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -