Both momentum and accruals are already well-known anomalies, yet the academics continue with their research. Prior research shows that the returns associated with accruals and momentum are strong and robust in all size groups, cross-sectional regressions, and tests based on different portfolio sorting methods. However, very little attention was paid to the empirical connection between these two anomalies. In this paper, the authors focus on filling this gap by investigating and analyzing the effect of accruals on momentum to understand the profitability of momentum strategies. More specifically, they focus on two empirical issues. Firstly, they analyze if accruals are related to momentum. Secondly, if so, can accrual-based variables be used to explain momentum profits.
The results show that the momentum anomaly seems to work the best among high-accruals companies. Using double-sorts, the momentum anomaly is economically and statistically significant only in the high accruals stocks. Therefore, the returns of the momentum strategy can be largely enhanced by employing the strategy only in the universe of the high accruals stocks.

Fundamental reason
Managers can use accruals to signal their private information on future transactions and to opportunistically manipulate earnings. As investors, traders, and media attach high importance to short-term earnings performance expecting quick and easy profit, and not looking at the earning performance with a wider perspective over a longer period. Therefore, including accruals into a company’s income statement could be easily used to mislead and manipulate them. Prior studies indicate that managers of overvalued firms are likely to manage their firms’ accruals even more upwards to extend the overvaluation and gain certain benefits.
It’s shown that momentum profitability is statistically significant and economically large among high-accrual companies. However, it is nonexistent or much weaker among low- and medium-accrual companies. The results are robust yet they cannot be explained by any of the following suggested explanations: the market factor, the time-varying beta, the Fama-French three factors, trading volume, credit ratings, and not even by the momentum factor. Two hypotheses have been proposed – earnings overestimation and earnings manipulation. Analyses are provided to predict the actual power of accruals for stock returns based on three tests. Nevertheless, no significant discrepancy is found in momentum profit across non-discretionary components of accruals and the discretionary accruals contribute the most to the discrepancy in momentum profits. These findings largely support the earnings manipulation hypothesis. To conclude, it indicates that accrual-based momentum profit is largely driven by the downward payoff of loser stocks with high accruals, affected by both earnings manipulation and earnings overestimation.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE and AMEX). The sample is limited to non-financial firms, excluding foreign firms, closed-end funds, a real estate investment trust (REIT), and American Depository Receipt (ADR).
Firstly, all qualified stocks are divided into three equal groups based on their previous fiscal year accruals (A1 for the low accruals, A2 for the medium accruals, and A3 for the high accruals). Secondly, for each accrual group, divide stocks into quantiles based on their cumulative past six month returns (P1 for the past loser stocks and P5 for the past winner stocks). In the highest accruals group, long the winner portfolio and short the loser portfolio. The positions are held for six months. There is a one month gap between the formation and the holding periods. Strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on the results in Table 6, the strategy is profitable in both recession and expansion (NBER Business Cycles), up and down markets (using 12-month cumulative returns on the CRSP value-weighted market index) and also during both optimistic and pessimistic sentiment of the investors.