A constant debate rages on in the financial community among investors and other participants in financial markets as they frequently perceive public information differently. Some participants may speculate whether others didn’t receive more or less information and based their further interpretation and trading decisions accordingly.
Novel research shows that it is possible to measure the level of disagreement and predict expected stock returns based on that. Specifically, the author constructed a model where traders are sorted into two types based on how they interpret a new public signal. When a new public signal is out and available, traders face a decision on how to interpret this signal. However, when they make a decision, they see others contradicting interpretations of the signal and are faced with uncertainty. As a result, they may alternate between attributing the differences to different information processing or information asymmetry. Further, when the public signal is very unreliable, the model predicts a positive relationship between investor disagreement and expected stock returns when combined with traders that display ambiguity aversion. In equilibrium, the relationship between trading volume and absolute price change is less when investor disagreement is stronger, according to the model.
To conclude, if the interpretation of the public signal is uncertain, the model predicts a positive relationship between investor disagreement (ID) and expected stock return. After sorting stocks into deciles based on the ID level, stocks in the highest ID decile outperform stocks in the lowest ID decile by 8.7% yearly.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is investors’ behavioral bias. When faced with ambiguity, traders are ambiguity-averse, which is a fundamental behavioral assumption in this model. The Ellsberg Paradox (Ellsberg (1961)) argues that people are resistant to imprecise possibilities, but don’t always act as if they do. The market participants are divided into two types with equal mass exhibiting risk and ambiguity aversion. After a public signal is released, these two types of traders may differ in their interpretations of the information. The first type has a positive view of the signal. On the other hand, the second has a negative point of view. Therefore, when the public signal is highly imprecise, the disagreement model indicates that investor disagreement is positively related to predicted stock returns. The theory states that traders with ambiguity aversion attribute an information precision to the other type’s interpretation, resulting in the highest posterior interpretation of the public signal. Therefore, traders give the other type’s interpretation more (less) weight if it is higher (lower) than their view. In the end, the number of traders facing ambiguity reduces, as some traders of both types choose to trust in the other’s view or stick to their own. The average interpretation of the public signal drops and the author proved that this decrease is inversely related to investor disagreement. Therefore, the price grows, and the price increase is rigorously increasing the investor dispute.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). Exclude stocks which price is less than 5 dollars and has missing return and volume. Further, exclude all stocks that have less than 30 eligible trading days.
Firstly, estimate the investor disagreement (ID) for each stock. The ID is defined as the contemporaneous correlation coefficient of daily trading volume and absolute price change over the past two months, multiplied by -1. Secondly, sort stocks into ten decile portfolios based on investor disagreement (ID) at the end of the previous month. Decile 1 consists of stocks with the lowest investor disagreement, and decile 10 of stocks with the highest.
The trading strategy goes long for the decile 10 (high ID) portfolios and short for the decile 1 (low ID) portfolios. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The results (Table 3) state a negative market beta of -0.15, which is statistically significant. However, this is not a guarantee that the strategy would perform well when a shock arrives.