Liao Xu, Xiangkang Yin and Jing Zhao (2018, revised 2021) identify an important speculating strategy that is likely to be adopted by APs (Authorized Participants) and their clients: acquire or retire ETF shares in the primary markets using information asymmetry resulting for APs and their clients to reap substantial abnormal profits. Most APs serve not only the roles of dealers and arbitrageurs but also market makers of ETFs utilizing various market-making and cross-market arbitraging techniques; the unexpected ETF flow component that is orthogonal to the demand- and arbitrage-driven components can credibly predict both the ETF returns and macro news of the next day in an economically and statistically significant way. Authors find that return predictability by unexpected ETF flows is conditional, depending on the spread between the ETF’s price and its Net Asset Value (NAV). On days when an ETF is traded at a premium (discount), ETF share creation (redemption) can powerfully predict the next day’s positive (negative) returns. However, the creation (redemption) does not credibly predict returns on days when the ETF is traded at a discount (premium).

Fundamental reason
Market players, regulatory authorities, and policymakers are concerned about APs’ potential conflict of interest, especially at times of market stress (Su (2018)). Some question whether APs could front-run their own trades and what the effects of APs’ informativeness are in those cases. Most studies on the subject of information asymmetry focus on firm-specific information, but there is increased interest in studying market-wide information. Limited by the scope of this paper, they leave such important issues to future research. This paper is significant contribution to research of information asymmetry of macro news in ETF markets, which has not been well examined by empirical analysis.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of ETFs from Bloomberg database. Data of outstanding ETF shares are also obtained from Bloomberg or can be obtained from ETF Global data. We construct a value-weighted portfolio with a simple rule: At the close of day t, we categorize all ETFs in our sample into two groups based on Flow variable, and then long ETFs with unexpected positive Flow, and short ones with negative. The Flow variable is calculated as the difference in outstanding ETF shares between two days. Whole procedure is to be found from 2.2 ETF Flow Decomposition. The weight of the single individual ETF in question is the ratio of ETF size to the total size of all ETFs in the sample on day t, where the size of an ETF is proxied by the value of assets under its management. The final portfolio is then rebalanced intraday, ETFs are bought at open and sold at close.

Quantpedia edit: Our backtest shows that the opposite trading rules (selling ETFs with positive flows, buying ETFs with negative flows, and holding intraday) perform better than the original rules from the academic paper.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Not mentioned; Article does not provide any variant of strategy suited for bear markets.