GSCORE is a scoring system used in growth stocks to measure whether they are or are not overvalued. Growth stocks are especially vulnerable to irrational exuberance when investors naively extrapolate past growth into the future. The GSCORE helps to determine the future strength of profitability and earnings stability, and it evaluates steps companies make to stay ahead of their competition (like R&D, etc.). This scoring system could be enhanced by technical indicators like pure momentum and a BOS ratio (which measures the covariance of past returns and the past trading volume of each individual stock). A BOS ratio is used to examine the strength of momentum winners and losers in future periods, and it measures the presence of asymmetric information in each stock. The theory says that stocks with a larger degree of asymmetric information (small BOS ratio in winner firms and large BOS ratio in losers) have stronger momentum. The combined GSCORE and BOS ratios create a very strong predictor of future returns, and a trading strategy that uses both of them in combination delivers substantial profits. However, the overall strategy’s implementability is highly questionable, as this strategy has extreme levels of volatility.

Fundamental reason
The GSCORE is the measurement of the stability and growth of earnings. Therefore it helps to identify stocks that are less likely to be overvalued because of the naïve extrapolation by the stock market. Momentum anomaly is one of the strongest anomalies on the market (caused mainly by behavioral biases like investor herding and investor over- and under-reactions), and the BOS ratio improves momentum predictability by limiting the equity universe to firms which are more susceptible to it.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all non-financial firms listed on the NYSE and AMEX (from the CRSP database). Firms that are foreign companies, closed-end funds, real estate investment trusts (REIT), and American Depository Receipts (ADR) or firms with a price less than one dollar or a negative book-to-market ratio are excluded. The investment universe is then shrunk into the top quintile of firms with the highest book-to-market ratio. A triple sort is then performed.

First, stocks with the highest 12-month momentum are selected (the top quintile) into a winner portfolio, and stocks with the lowest 12-month momentum are selected (bottom quintile) into a loser portfolio.

The BOS ratio is then calculated for each portfolio as a covariance between each stock’s past 12-month return and the stock’s average volume in the past 12 months (calculated as a stock’s monthly volume divided by the cross-section average of the monthly dollar trading volume for all stocks in the same quintile portfolio). Only stocks with the lowest BOS ratio from the winner portfolio are then selected into the new (shrunk) winner portfolio and only stocks with the highest BOS ratio from the loser portfolio are then selected into the new (shrunk) loser portfolio.

The GSCORE is then calculated for each stock in the winner and loser portfolios (see Mohanram’s paper or see “Separating Strong and Weak Growth Stocks” trading system). The investor then goes long on the top quintile of stocks with the highest GSCORE ratio from the winner portfolio and short on the bottom quintile of stocks with the lowest GSCORE ratio from the loser portfolio.

The portfolio is rebalanced every month, and stocks are weighted equally.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.

