Stock picking is a well-known practice in the financial markets. In the past, portfolios were often constructed by single or double-sorting based on some indicator or fundamental data. Nowadays, it is easy to employ machine learning algorithms, and the portfolios can be built using large datasets. Frequently, non-linear or machine learning methods can combine the information in a superior way compared to the traditional linear approach such as the linear regression model.
This novel research examines the usability of machine learning algorithms for stock picking, using both fundamental and technical data. The authors are very precise and examine various machine learning algorithms such as regularized regressions, principal component regressions, random forests and boosting, and both feedforward and recurrent neural networks. Methods are used to predict whether a constituent of S&P500 (or EUROSTOXX 600) outperforms the market over the subsequent week. Each model has its own characteristics and is trained based on the three years of data and used during the following year, after which the model is retrained and cross-validated. Each model is able to outperform both S&P500 or equally weighted constituents significantly, but the best practice seems to be the combination of all models. The authors present the ensemble model that combines all models by simply averaging over all forecasts. Such a model tends to have the best performance metrics and is not overly oriented on one specific model, eliminating possible overfitting.

Fundamental reason
The machine learning algorithms are often seen as black-boxes, but it’s not always true. Often, we can identify the essential features using machine learning algorithms. Moreover, the machine learning algorithms are often used to identify non-linear dependencies without a specified model, and while this can be labelled as a black-box, it often works. Each model significantly outperforms simple benchmarks in terms of risk-adjusted-performance.
Returns of machine learning stock-picking models cannot be fully explained by the common equity factors since there are both economically and statistically significant alphas of six factor augmented Fama-French model. Additionally, the performance is relatively consistent through time, since the outperformance is present on fifteen out of nineteen years.
Lastly, the paper suggests that machine learning strategies do not follow a static factor strategy. They have dynamic and fluctuating factor exposure, and some portion of the overperformance could be probably attributed to the factor timing.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P 500 constituents. Firstly, consider PCA, Ridge, LASSO and Enet regressions, Random Forests, Boosting, DNN and LSTM machine learning models. Data consists of Fundamental data: various factors such as Size, Value, Quality, Profitability and Growth, and Technical indicators: Momentum, Moving Averages, Risk, Short Term Reversal and Trading Volume. All indicators (features) are standardized based on the mean and the standard deviation of each feature in each training set. The full list of variables is in Table 1. Each Wednesday (or the following trading day), models are trained on the label whether a specific stock outperforms or underperforms the median stock return in the subsequent week. Tuning parameters and cross-validation techniques are often individual – based on the time available and computing power, but the approach of the authors is presented in the paper. As a next step, an ensemble model that combines all models by simply averaging over all forecasts is computed. Lastly, pick 50 stocks with the highest predicted outperformance probability. The strategy is rebalanced weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - From the yearly returns and charts, it is obvious that the strategy cannot be used as a hedge during bear markets. The performance is better compared to benchmarks, but it would still suffer loses.