Decades of the previous academic research has focused mainly on domestic (U.S.) option products. However, only a little is known about international option returns outside of the U.S. markets (International options refer to equity options on the country´s ETF). Novel research has explored newly-issued derivatives, finding that they may be an interesting path for unexplored returns. This research has identified two new patterns in international option returns: cross-sectional mispricing and a dispersion trading risk premium. Although we would deal only with the cross-sectional mispricing, the other anomaly is definitely worth mentioning and can be found in the source paper.

To be more precise, international option returns on ETPs (exchange-traded products) and indexes reveal an asset pricing anomaly by sorting on ex-ante volatility returns. Naturally, this anomaly could be utilized in a simple trading strategy, if the options are sorted in descending order by previous day volatility returns and assigned to one of three equally weighted tercile portfolios. After this simple sorting, a strategy that sells the expensive tercile and buys the cheap tercile is able to deliver major and significant returns accompanied by the low volatility. Interestingly, the international long-short option portfolio yields annualized risk-adjusted returns ranging between 16% and 20%.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, substantial volatility deviations across both ETP and index options reveal an inconsistency in the pricing of derivatives at the international level. Moreover, this effect is economically sizable internationally, with more than solid annualized risk-adjusted returns, whereas it is small in the domestic derivative space. Simply said, the significance is both statistically and economically more pronounced internationally than domestically. Interestingly, hedge funds are not exploiting volatility deviations among international option products. By means of simple univariate regressions of hedge funds indexes on international and domestic option strategies, the paper has found a significant statistical exposure of these funds only towards domestic option portfolios. This may imply the possibility of finding some opportunities in foreign volatility arbitrage which could be utilized by practitioners.The paper identifies various main determinants of the different pricing behaviour of international options, to be more precise, the determinants are large volatility deviations, substantial heterogeneity in contract specifications and only a recent issuance of international ETP products. Last but not least, despite their sizable abnormal returns, international long-short option returns are positively skewed with low volatility and have a neutral exposure to the equity market.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of International Option Products (various ETF options – the complete list can be found in the paper – table A.1). Firstly, considering the basket of options, the investor has to compute the implied volatility returns. This is estimated as one minus the ratio of previous year realized volatility (the realized volatility estimated from the underlying returns daily data over the last 12 months) to time t implied volatility (the average implied volatility of ATM call and ATM put options at time t). Nextly, ATM straddles are sorted in descending order by previous day volatility returns and assigned to one of three equally weighted tercile portfolios. The long-short portfolio sells the expensive tercile (high) and buys the cheap tercile (low) each fourth Friday of the month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.