Throughout history, technological innovation and advancement have been credited as fundamental drivers of economic growth on a micro and macro level. However, some of the most widely used models in measuring growth and subsequent stock returns do not account for technological innovation. Therefore, the authors of this paper look to separate methodology in pricing innovators and non-innovators, and they introduce a new measure of technological innovation accounting for patents held by a firm relative to their market capitalisation. Known as the patent intensity of a technological innovator.

This paper looks to extend on work surrounding this by proposing this new ‘patent intensity’ term, but also shows that using expected growth as part of the model is vital and needed when using such a model to price and predict returns. Therefore, we look to use this proposed notion in a strategy around purchasing stocks in firms that show high levels of innovation and going short on those that don’t.

Fundamental reason
Through this paper, the authors make the point that innovative firms are wrongly priced in the current market as existing models rely mainly on accounting and profitability factors. However, in reality, these firms often face large growth but show low levels of profitability due to the nature of their product and higher proportions of reinvestment, especially in their early years, compared to conventional non-innovative firms. Hence, a separate methodology is required to measure growth and predict returns for an innovative firm. One that considers and favours innovation and investment to profitability. Therefore, as proposed by the authors, patent intensity is a very useful indicator of growth and returns amongst technological innovators. Hence, we find basing our trading strategy around this notion justifies its functionality and profitability.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks listed on the NYSE. The variable of interest s the patent intensity (P.I. value) corresponding to each listed firm. Patent data can be sourced using the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) and market capitalisation data can be found abundantly online. Using this, we can find the patent intensity as the ratio of patents received (over the last 12-months) to market capitalisation for the firm. We can then sort our universe based on P.I. values, low to high. We then split our sorted P.I. universe into quartiles. We find the first quartile will mostly contain non-innovators and the higher quartiles will contain the high-intensity innovators as a result. We will then form our portfolio by going short on stocks associated with firms in the first quartile and going long on those in the quartiles associated with high P.I. values. All stocks are weighted equally and the portfolio is rebalanced on a yearly basis (each year on June 30).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -