So far, academic research has identified a lot of anomalies which were originally found in the stocks. Still, later it was also found that the exact same anomalies can also be found in the other asset classes or equity indexes. The problem with quantitative trading strategies is that a lot of anomalies do not work anymore or do not work at a certain time connected with abnormal conditions. Therefore it could be worth to frequently make an informed decision which strategies should be utilized in the practitioner’s portfolio. This novel research tries to find one of the many possible solutions for such task with a strategy-rotation approach by using the value spread, where the value spread of a long-short anomaly portfolio is simply the difference in valuation ratios between the long and the short sides of the trade. Aforementioned is simply a measure of how cheap or expensive a given strategy currently is. As the research shows, the value spread can be utilized to select the future winners from a larger set of strategies and later on, those strategies are used for country asset allocation. The sample of this paper includes 120 quantitative that can be easily used within a sample of 42 countries ETFs. The most important finding is that, naturally, the country-level anomalies with the widest spreads outperform the strategies with the narrowest spreads. Therefore, forming a portfolio of country allocation strategies that go long (paper also includes theory about going short or even long-short strategy) the strategies with the broadest value spreads delivers significant positive both raw and abnormal returns.

Fundamental reason
The economic background of the value spread could be easily understood. Literature offers a lot of both theoretical and empirical evidence that valuation ratios can be utilized as indicators of future returns, where naturally, stocks with high fundamental-to-price ratios tend to outperform stocks with low fundamental-to-price ratios. Therefore, in some given portfolio, the spread between the long and short sides of the trade should be a reliable indicator of future long-short portfolio performance. In this paper, similar logic is applied and according to the authors, the expected return on a given strategy is high when the long side of the trade is attractively priced (or cheap) in comparison with the short side of the trade. The value spread is simply a measure that is used to evaluate the price or the “cheapness” of the long side relative to the short side. Clearly, high difference indicates that the long portfolio is attractively priced compared to the short portfolio, what predicts high future returns and vice versa, a low difference should predict the poor performance of a given strategy. Last but not least, the theory is applicable because the idea could be utilized with the usage of liquid ETFs, which ensures that the strategy is easily tradeable.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 42 country exchange-traded funds. As a first step, 120 individual international equity strategies are constructed (the full list of strategies is in table 2). The 120 anomalies fall into nine major categories based on the underlying economic rationales: value versus growth, momentum, quality, investment, liquidity, skewness and extreme risk, low-risk, reversal and seasonality. The formation procedure of the anomaly portfolios is identical for all of the anomalies. To obtain a return in month t, sort all ETFs on anomaly-related return-predicting variables at the end of month t-1 and determine the 25th and 75th percentiles – the breakpoints. Nextly, use all the ETFs from the top and bottom quartiles of the rankings to form equal-weighted portfolios and build monthly rebalanced long-short zero-investment portfolios, where a long position is taken in the portfolio with higher expected returns, and the short position is taken in the portfolio with lower expected returns according to the anomaly. Value spread is defined as the difference between valuation ratios of the long and short sides of the zero-investment anomaly portfolio. This paper employs the EBITDA-to-enterprise value ratio (EBEV) as a value measure. Finally, the value spread is calculated as the difference of two weighted sums of EBEVs (for long and short side – for the exact formula see equation one on page 10). Finally, go long 12 strategies with the highest value spreads. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.