Consumer demand data are mainly private and unobserved. Nevertheless, they could serve as a reliable source of a firm’s stock returns and future fundamentals. The authors use a dataset of individual credit and debit card transactions to examine whether transaction data positively predict a company’s future earnings surprises.

Several studies have acknowledged the efficiency of consumer demand data. The work of Aragwal, Qian, and Zou (2021) claims that a measure of adjusted customer spending positively predicts post announcements returns. However, they use only credit card data. This paper extends research on credit and debit card transactions. The data are available at a daily frequency and serve as a reliable source of information. Authors construct monthly SALES INDEX based on a direct measure of sales from credit and debit card data. Subsequently, they compute the year-over-year percentage change in the SALES INDEX. According to the authors, the data positively predict future earnings surprises over the next three quarters, both in large and small-cap stocks. Additionally, they suggest that investors can acquire valuable returns by trading based on the signals constructed from consumer data.

This simple strategy tells us to sort stock based on the change in their SALES INDEX and go long on the top tercile and short on the bottom tercile. The top group includes “improving” stocks, while the bottom group represents “worsening” stocks with decreasing SALES INDEX.

Fundamental reason
According to past research, consumer demand data contain relevant information about the popularity of various investments and help predict future stock returns. Moreover, using alternative data helps to gain an advantage over investors who use only traditional sources of information. On top of that, consumer demand data from credit and debit cards are a reliable source of information, as they are more timely and less noisy than traditional market data. As reported by the authors, the return of the strategy is statistically and economically significant, and the strategy is robust to the type of transaction data.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 275 US Consumer Discretionary stocks. The data come from an alternative data service vendor, Compustat, and IBES. For each month t calculate the sum of Daily Total Sales and the sum of the Daily Adjustment Index. Their ratio represents monthly SALES INDEX. Subsequently, calculate ΔSALES representing year-over-year percentage change in the SALES INDEX. Sort stocks based on their ΔSALES value. The top group includes stocks with the largest ΔSALES, while the bottom group represents stocks with the lowest ΔSALES. Go long on the top tercile (“improving” stocks) and short on the bottom tercile (“worsening” stocks). The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide any information about strategies performance during uncertain times.