Turn of the Month (TOM) is a well-known effect in equity markets connected with buying pressure from mutual and pension funds that move stock prices. Usually, one anomaly can be found in various asset classes and not in the only one where it was originally discovered. Academic research shows that the turn of the month effect isn’t limited just to equity markets. Additionally, in the universe of futures, there seems to be a link between momentum or trend-following strategies and the turn of the month days.

This research shows that a major part of the returns of trend-following strategies is realized during three days around the turn of the month. Since these momentum strategies during the TOM days have digested sizeable inflows, managers tend to scale up the portfolio they were already holding at the time. Naturally, the aforementioned causes a buying pressure from systematic trend-following/momentum CTA funds, which results in a movement of futures prices from various sectors – commodities, rates, currencies and equities in their favour.

The whole idea could be easily exploited by employing the trading strategy that trades only during these three days. The main improvement compared to traditional momentum strategies is that such an approach leads to better risk-adjusted returns than common trend-following/momentum strategies.

Fundamental reason
The fundamental reason for the functionality is deeply connected with buying pressure. Momentum strategies during the turn of the month days have digested sizeable inflows, which causes that managers tend to scale up the portfolio they were already holding at the time. Another possibility is that managers simply do their portfolio rebalancing at the end of the month. However, in both cases, the aforementioned causes a buying pressure from systematic trend-following/momentum CTA funds, which temporarily moves prices of underlying futures in the same direction and causes this effect.

Additionally, the combined momentum and turn of the month affect the reverses partially over the subsequent period (non-turn of the month days), which could be expected from a temporary price pressure. This anomaly is much stronger for illiquid commodities, what again, is in line with the hypothesis and also could be expected. Last but not least, the paper has shown that the combined anomaly cannot be simply explained by a turn of the month effect in passive long positions.

Simple trading strategy
The investor constructs replicating index utilizing 52 liquid futures (5 currencies, 20 commodities, 17 equity indices, 10 fixed income). An investor uses time-series momentum strategy where he calculates 100-day SMA indicator scaled by securities volatility for each future contract. 100-day SMA signalizes long/short signal and portfolio of futures is volatility weighted. The investor then holds this portfolio only during the 3-day period around the turn of the month. More than 50% of the total return of the time-series momentum strategy is realized during ToM period, and resultant ToM momentum strategy has a much higher risk-adjusted return than the original strategy.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy is trading futures markets but holds portfolio only for a very short period of time; therefore, it is not suitable as a hedge/diversification during market/economic crises.