Every time period has its own “hits”. The current hit among trading strategies is to use large datasets, which consist of some sort of behavioral data (outside of financial markets) to predict people’s moods (tweets from Twitter, Facebook statuses, Google search history, etc.). A lot of these systems are often impractical to use as they require the analysis of large amounts of data; however, one effect is less data-intensive and could, therefore, be valuable for its real implementation – Google Search queries. Academic research shows that the volume of search for financial tickers predicts short-term stock returns. A portfolio that consists of long positions in stocks with a high past search volume and short positions in stocks with a low past search volume earns an excess alpha return of 7% per year (9% raw returns). However, this effect has a high portfolio turnover (weekly rebalancing), which undermines possible gains from the strategy. This could probably be overcome by narrowing the number of stocks held in the portfolio or using the Google search effect as part of a multifactor model.

Fundamental reason
Academic research speculates that a ticker search is more valuable for somebody considering a “buy” decision rather than a “sell” decision. This is because someone who owns the stock is already knowledgeable about the company’s history and recent stock performance. A search query for a ticker symbol is likely to characterize the behavior of naïve, retail investors as opposed to sophisticated, institutional investors. This is because sophisticated, institutional investors can easily access and analyze precise sources of information from in-house proprietary information databases. Therefore, this buying pressure could generate short-run momentum.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks from the S&P 500 index. Companies that have tickers that may have other meanings such as ACE, COST, and ZION are excluded. Data for Google search history comes from http://www.google.com/insights/search/ . The reporting interval is weekly, and the results are updated every Sunday. The investor is interested in the number of searches for each stock’s ticker.

On the first trading day of every week, the investor sorts the universe into five quintiles based on the intensity of the ticker search in the preceding week. The investor goes “long” on high search intensity stocks and “short” on low search intensity stocks. Stocks are weighted equally, and the portfolio is rebalanced weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Source research papers show a positive correlation of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk (see Table 3), therefore we can’t directly use this strategy as a hedge/diversification during a time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.