Liquidity measures how easily can a given asset be sold without significantly affecting its price. It means that a liquid stock is easily sold (or that bid-ask spread is in balance), while an illiquid stock might be a bit harder to sell. Generally, liquidity is considered to be one of the independent risk factors. Much has been written about it, for example, that low liquidity stocks tend to perform better than high liquidity ones. However, a stock’s liquidity level can change over time, leading us to the term of liquidity volatility. Liquidity volatility measures how much the liquidity of given stock changes over time, essentially how volatile the liquidity is. This research shows that liquidity volatility has the ability to predict future stock returns negatively. The predictive power of the turnover ratio or monthly trading volume has already been shown in the past, leading financial economists to theorize about its causes for some time now.
The authors test the liquidity volatility premium on the large, international market sample of 43 countries, confirming its global presence, and test it with various models (the illiquidity ratio Amihud and the proportion of zero-return days in a given month). They also confirm it’s not caused by the idiosyncratic volatility, with which it, however, is correlated. The most likely explanation for its existence is the asymmetry between investors’ reactions to decreases and increases in liquidity. Thus going long the low liquidity volatility stocks and short the high liquidity volatility stocks in a long-short equity portfolio is a seemingly good and reasonable trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
We already hinted at the main reason for this strategy’s functionality. There exists an asymmetry between the investors’ reactions to increases and decreases in liquidity. When there is a considerable decrease in liquidity of the stock, some investors (e.g., those who are trading leverage) might be forced to sell, causing a price drop, causing more people to sell (“the illiquidity spiral effect”). On the other hand, increases in liquidity aren’t priced well enough. So an increase in the volatility won’t make up for the decrease which happened beforehand. This means that high liquidity volatility stocks will perform worse than the illiquid ones, giving rise to this trading strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks from markets all over the world – 17 emerging markets (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Turkey) and 26 developed markets (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Israel, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, the U.K., and the U.S.) are used in the paper. In these markets, one main stock exchange is usually chosen, however in China, both Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange are included; in Japan, the Osaka Securities Exchange and the Tokyo Stock Exchange; in South Korea, the Korea Stock Exchange, and the KOSDAQ and both the NYSE and the AMEX in the U.S. In the U.S., only stocks with share codes 10 and 11 are included; in other markets are excluded “non-common” stocks such as duplicates, ETFs, REITs, and others. This is done based on the work of Griffin et al. (2010) and Amihud et al. (2015).
Use Amihud illiquidity ratio as a sorting metric (calculated based on the absolute value of the return of stock, trading volume of stock, and the number of trading days with non-zero volume; for exact equation, see page 11, equation (2) in the linked research paper).
In each market, for a given stock, at the end of the month, calculate the value of liquidity level (Amihud) over the last 12 months, and calculate the coefficient of variation of liquidity over the last 36 months. Based on the liquidity level, divide the stocks into three liquidity groups. Now inside of each group, sort the stocks into quintiles based on the coefficient of variation. Inside of each of the three liquidity groups, short the highest quintile, long the lowest. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include any information regarding this topic.