Trading volume/turnover has always been considered to contain important information about an asset and plays a critical role in financial markets. Under information asymmetry theory, investors trade strategically, which results in information being incorporated in prices slowly over time. At higher frequency, however, different studies find that trading turnover positively predicts stock returns. The predictive power of the turnover is attributed to two components: ETURN and UTURN. ETURN is expected trading activity which is represented by moving average and its autoregressive properties. UTURN represents the unexpected trading power as a residual component from the regression for overall turnover. The UTURN positively predicts the cross-section of stock returns; therefore strategy buys the stocks with the highest unexpected trading turnover and sells the stocks with the lowest unexpected trading turnover.

Fundamental reason
At monthly horizons, UTURN positively predicts the cross-section of stock returns. Academic research states that there is evidence that behavioural biases and investors’ attention significantly contribute to the variation in abnormal trading activities of securities both in time-series and cross-section. Behavioural biases and investors’ attention induces abnormal trading activity, but the price impact of abnormal trading activity is primarily related to behavioural biases. The past market and security return positively predict abnormal trading activity, of which magnitude is greater for high hard-to-value stocks. Also, only when investors are optimistic, investor sentiment positively predicts abnormal trading activity, especially for high attention stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all common stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. A rolling-window regression with 36 months rolling window is made for each stock (formula of the regression is on page 6 of the academic paper). The raw trading turnover is then divided into two parts: ETURN – explained turnover that relates to the prior trading behaviour and UTURN – abnormal and unexplained turnover that is calculated as a residual divided by the standard deviation of the residuals from the regression. Stocks are then sorted into quintiles based on the UTURN indicator. Investor goes long stocks from Q5 quintal (the lowest values of UTURN) and short stocks from Q1 quintile (the highest values of UTURN). The portfolio is equally-weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.