Short-term return reversal represents a well-known market anomaly, which describes a situation where securities with the highest return over a certain short-term period subsequently tend to underperform the securities that performed poorly in the same time period. This anomaly has been widely documented in its many forms across various markets and asset classes.
Recently the study from Junqing Kang et al. (2021) has documented the presence of this anomaly in the cross-section of intraday returns in the U.S stock market. In this research, the authors mainly focus on investigating the cross-sectional relationship between previous return (from market close of day t-1 to 10 a.m. of day t) and subsequent return during the rest of the day t. Since the presence of this anomaly in the U.S stock market has been previously documented by more studies (i.e. Lehman, 1990; Avramov, Chordia and Goyal, 2006), the main contribution of this paper does not lie in the discovery of anomaly itself but rather in providing evidence, that reversal pattern is most significant during the 30 minutes before market close. Still, the strategy is an interesting addition into screener. A trading strategy that goes during the last 30 trading minutes long(short) on the stocks with the lowest(highest) previous return earned on average a daily return of 0,08% from 2000 to 2012.

Fundamental reason
Various academic researches argue that documented short-term reversal effect in the U.S equity markets has its base in the illiquidity, which means that the reversal compensates investors for providing liquidity and undertaking risk. The reason why the reversal is most significant during the last 30 minutes of the trading day could be found in the dominance of institutional investors in the U.S market. As shown in Gao et al. (2018), these investors tend to trade mainly during the early and late period of trading hours.
Additionally, the researchers provide evidence that the reversal effect remains robust after controlling for traditional risk factors as size, value, momentum, volatility and volume.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks traded in NYSE, NASDAQ and AMEX with codes ’10’ or ‘11’. The intraday price data are obtained from Trade and Quote database. We consider only stocks with current price is higher than 5 USD, have at least 10 non-missing daily stock return during the last month and are part of the employed database for longer than 6 months. These filters are applied at the beginning of the month, and such a filtered sample is used for the rest of the month. On a daily level, exclude stocks that are paying out dividends or are undergoing a stock split.
For each stock in our sample, calculate the measure of previous return as the current price at 10:00 a.m. of day t (30 minutes after open of the U.S stock market) divided by the closing price of the previous day t-1. At 3:30 p.m., go long(short) on the decile of stocks with the lowest(highest) measure. When creating a portfolio, exclude stocks for which the considered previous return has been greater than 5% in absolute value. Also, exclude stocks whose return between 10:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. has been greater than 5% in absolute value and stocks that have not experienced a single trade during this period. The portfolio is value-weighted and held until the market close of day t (for 30 minutes).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Equity reversal strategy is usually a type of “liquidity providing” strategy, and as such, they typically perform well during market crises. However, reversal strategy is also naturally a type of “short volatility” strategy; their returns increase mainly in the weeks following large stock market declines. Traders must be cautious during crises during days with high volatility as reversal strategies usually force traders to buy stocks which performed especially bad (and to sell short stocks with an extremely positive short term performance). This position is emotionally hard to open, and risk management of reversal strategies must also be very strict during these days. We recommend reading a research paper by Nagel: “Evaporating Liquidity” to gain insight into the behavior of reversal strategies during crises.