American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) are certificates, denominated in USD that represent shares of non-US company securities. ADRs are among the most direct and popular financial instruments for investing in foreign companies and have been actively used to diversify portfolios. Some of the most traded ETFs are comprised of ADRs as well. Returns of the ADRs are significantly dependent on the market sentiments of both the US and originating home markets. Since intraday returns reflect price fluctuations during US market hours, they are expected to have a relatively high correlation with the US market returns. On a similar note, overnight returns are expected to have a significantly lower correlation. The strategy focuses on the time discrepancy between different markets and its influence on the trading pairs ADR-SPY. ADR represents Asian market and SPY is a proxy of the US market. The investor opens positions when the spread between ADR (or ETF, which has a lot of ADRs) and SPY is on a certain level and makes the assumption that the spread will decrease after a certain time.

Fundamental reason
Due to their cross-border nature, ADRs’ returns are signiﬁcantly dependent on the market sentiments of both the U.S. and originating home markets. Especially, ADRs from Asian countries, such as Japan, Hong Kong, China, Taiwan, India, and Korea, are of particular interest for two reasons. First, these ADRs provide U.S. investors with direct viable means to invest in foreign and emerging markets. Second, the time zones for the aforementioned countries are 13 to 14 hours ahead of New York’s Eastern Standard Time (EST). Therefore, the trading hours of the U.S. market and their home markets do not overlap. The originating home markets open after the U.S. market closes and vice versa. This leads to not only their asynchronous returns with underlying equities but also the price ﬂuctuations during and after the U.S. market hours. The strategy is based on the time-inconsistency that leads to the spread between ADR and SPY and the assumption that the spread will soon escalate back due to its mean-reverting nature.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of two ETFs. The first ETF, SPY (SPDR S&P500 ETF) is chosen as a proxy of the US market. The second ETF, FXI (iShares China Large-Cap ETF), consists of ADRs and is chosen because it is one of the most traded ETF of this type on the US market. The investor then sets a threshold value as k% (in this case, k= -0,4%). The threshold value is the daily spread between ADR and SPY. The spread reaching values less than -0,4% determines the moment when investor opens positions – long with ADR and short with SPY. The holding period is one day, and every position is entered and closed only at market close. The portfolio is equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.