The usage of the accruals in the investment strategies is nothing new. So far, there exists a large number of anomalies connected with accruals. Accruals have long been indicators of the firm’s earnings quality, and naturally, they are incorporated in trading strategies used in the professional practice. A large amount of literature has documented a negative correlation between accruals and subsequent stock returns, suggesting that investors overestimate the persistence of the accrual component of earnings. In the past, it was already proven that portfolio which longs firms with the most negative discretionary accruals and shorts the firms with the most positive discretionary accruals portfolio is significantly profitable. However, the past literature has dealt mainly with the most recent annual accruals. Novel research states that it is worth to incorporate also past accruals to the investing strategy. Firms can have consecutive high or low levels of accruals, and the aforementioned accruals may provide additional information that is not revealed by the annual accruals. We can define a string of high or low levels of annual discretionary accruals for four consecutive years as “accruals momentum”. The motivation to even define this momentum is clear; the accruals momentum have a predictive power of the future stock returns. Since high accruals momentum stocks tend to have a negative performance and low accruals momentum stocks tend to have a positive performance, one can simply construct a hedge portfolio that utilizes this anomaly with significant positive abnormal returns. The trading rule is simple, long stocks with low accruals momentum and short stocks with high accruals momentum.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the results of the paper clearly show that accruals momentum (the time series of discretionary accruals) provides additional information beyond the most recent accruals and investors react to it in the equity market. Secondly, the research has identified two possible explanations of the negative correlation between accruals momentum and subsequent stock returns. The first possible explanation is that accruals momentum indicates high levels of earning management and thus foreshadows future earnings reversals and lower subsequent returns. The second possible explanation is that accruals momentum could be another proxy for the firm’s growth, and the results are related to the well-documented growth anomaly. The analysis made by the paper was based on three growth proxies (book-to-market, asset growth and employee growth). It showed that the negative correlation between accruals momentum and subsequent returns is more pronounced for firms with low growth, suggesting that the accruals momentum measure is likely associated with manager’s continuous manipulation of earnings, refuting the possibility that a string of high accruals is a proxy for firm’s growth. The results also suggest that stock investors are more likely to take high accruals momentum into account, rather than low accruals momentum, when making investment decisions.
Additionally, the negative relations between high accruals momentum and subsequent three-, six- and twelve-month returns are consistently robust, and high accruals momentum provides additional information to the market beyond levels of modified discretionary accruals. Moreover, the results of the additional test demonstrate that earnings momentum is not a substitute for accruals momentum, indicating the degree of earnings management. Last but not least, subsample tests have also proven that high accruals momentum followed by low returns is robust to policy changes that could have affected firm’s disclosures and manager’s opportunistic behaviour, suggesting that market reactions to a string of high accruals momentum are not influenced by regulatory changes during the sample period of the paper.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ common stocks (share codes of 10 and 11 in CRSP). Firstly, obtain the coefficient estimates of alfa and betas by running the regressions of total accruals on the independent variables in Equation 2 (Jones model, the equation is on page 9). Estimate this model for each group sorted on two-digit SIC codes and firm years. After that, using the coefficients, compute fitted and residual values, which are non-discretionary and discretionary accruals, respectively. Then construct the accruals momentum measure by sorting firms into quartiles each year based on discretionary accruals estimated above. If a firm is in the lowest accruals quartile for any four consecutive years, this firm is classified as a firm with low accruals momentum. If a firm is in the highest accruals quartile for the four consecutive years, this firm is classified as a firm with high accruals momentum. Long the lowest momentum quartile and short the highest momentum quartile.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.
