Considering the stock transaction data from Finland, novel research has found that after realizing a loss, investors buy stocks with market beta signiﬁcantly higher than that of the old stocks which they were holding. This choice of higher beta stocks suddenly jumps up on the losing side but does not continue to rise with increasing losses. However, on the proﬁt side, the choice of beta remains indistinguishable from the beta of the old stock. After a loss, if the investor rolls over his mental account, losses hurt much less than the gains provide utility. Hence, the investor is willing to take a higher risk. If the acquisition eﬀect is aggregated across investors, it will lead to higher-than-usual demand for high beta stocks. And higher-than-usual demand for high beta stocks is the reason for the already a well-known beta anomaly (high abnormal return of low beta stocks). The Betting against beta (BAB) strategy utilizes this anomaly and takes a short position in a diversiﬁed high beta portfolio, and a long position in a levered up diversiﬁed low beta portfolio. Since it was proved that individuals demand high beta stocks after a loss, we should combine the aforementioned with the fact that a large fraction of investors demonstrates a tendency to buy a stock immediately after selling one. This leads to the fact that the demand for high beta stocks will be higher on negative market return days and the day after. Naturally, this predictable variation in demand can be utilized in a trading strategy which improves the basic Betting against beta strategy and outperforms it. Although research has been done primarily about a daily strategy, it comes with large trading costs and frequent turnovers. On the other hand, the monthly traded strategy does not have as good performance as the daily one (or at least theoretically). Still, the anomaly is exploitable even with a monthly rebalancing period while being both profitable and practical.

Fundamental reason
It can be empirically shown that individuals and institutions have a demand for higher beta stocks, particularly after making a loss. So, the beta anomaly (a higher than usual demand for high beta stocks) is at least partially due to this behaviour. An unconstrained arbitrageur, trying to exploit the beta anomaly, will use the betting against beta (BAB). However, based on the hypothesis of time-varying demand for high beta stocks, the BAB strategy returns should be weakened or even reversed on negative market return days and probably even the day after. Research has found evidence of this claim in CRSP data and suggests a wise modiﬁcation to the BAB strategy – an investor should bet against the beta on “normal” days and bet with the beta on the day after a negative market return, this daily-adjusted modiﬁed betting against beta strategy generates a Sharpe ratio more than twice as high as that obtained by a daily-adjusted BAB strategy. To sum it up, investor’s behaviour (individuals trying to break even by taking higher risk after a loss) causes an increase in demand for high beta stocks. The demand is associated with a realized loss, so on aggregate, this higher demand varies somewhat predictably and generates contrarian price movements. When the market is going down, there is a demand pressure on higher beta stocks, what is the reason why the higher beta stocks which should go down the most during market downturns, may not go down by as much or they may even go up.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of high market capitalization CRSP stocks listed primarily in NYSE and NASDAQ – stocks which have been among the top thousand market capitalization stocks in the previous year. Further, leave out stocks where market betas are estimated to be above two or below 0,3.

Firstly, divide the stocks into quintiles based on the past 48 months value-weighted market returns. Then use only the quintile with the highest returns and apply the Betting against beta strategy (https://quantpedia.com/Screener/Details/77 in our database – The beta for each stock is calculated with respect to the benchmark using a 1-year rolling window. Stocks are then ranked in ascending order on the basis of their estimated beta. The ranked stocks are assigned to one of two portfolios: low beta and high beta. Securities are weighted by the ranked betas and portfolios are rebalanced every calendar month. Both portfolios are rescaled to have a beta of one at portfolio formation. The “Betting-Against-Beta” is the zero-cost zero-beta portfolio that is long on the low-beta portfolio and short on the high-beta portfolio.).

The strategy is rebalanced monthly as the reason for high transaction costs and frequent turnovers connected with the daily strategy.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Low beta stocks (low-risk stocks) are usually safer during turmoil and Beta Factor in a long-short variant can be used as a portfolio hedge against equity risk. However caution should be used as the popularity of betting-against-beta investing could move valuation (measured by common valuation ratios like P/E, P/B, P/CF etc.) of low beta stocks into excessive-high (compared to neutral market valuation). This popularity of betting-against-beta factor investing and high valuation of low beta stocks can be then detrimental to their performance during market stress.