Over the last few years, exchanges started to offer an easy way to directly access dividend streams of various equity indexes via liquid futures on dividends. This development helped traders to access the new type of asset class. Dividend risk premium (accessed in the form of systematic strategy holding dividend futures long-only) is correlated to an underlying equity index. Still, the correlation is not one as dividends are not influenced by exactly same factors as equity indexes. However, equity futures could be advantageously used to the hedge-out equity component of long-only dividend risk premium strategy, and resultant hedged strategy offers nice risk/return characteristics with lower correlation to equities.

Fundamental reason
Research paper offers several reasons for dividend risk premium existence. Dividend investors may systematically overestimate the risk of single stock dividend cuts (the frequency of a dividend cut superior to 60% year-on-year by SX5E constituents has been only 4% since 1991, which makes large dividend cuts a low probability, high impact event and therefore the market price of that risk is likely to be impacted by strong risk aversion.). Dividend investors may systematically underestimate the benefit of diversification in dividend indices. Dividend investors may require a premium for liquidity risk (as dividend futures used for this strategy are less liquid). And the large long-SX5E dividend overhang of banks’ trading desks creates systematic mispricing of dividends.

Simple trading strategy
At first, an investor needs to achieve constant exposure to implied dividends, by trying to mimic a hypothetical 1-year constant tenor dividend future by taking a position in dividend futures with expiry dates around the desired 1-year tenor. This position is rolled daily to gradually take the weight in the dividend future with the closest expiry (the front future in the below) to zero. In contrast, the position in the other future (the back future) would gradually go to 100%. In order to extract a pure dividend risk premium, the investor goes long “1-year constant maturity” dividend futures and hedge the indirect equity exposure by going short the SX5E index against it. Every day, the hedge ratio is calculated using linear regression of the dividend futures returns versus the SX5E returns over the preceding two weeks.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.