In finance, investors and corporate decision-makers often rely on asset pricing models that operate under the assumption that the parameters in these models are known with certainty. In practice, however, model parameters are not directly observable and are subject to estimation-related uncertainties. In their study, Barry and Brown (1985) present an information uncertainty-based model wherein investors require a premium for holding assets with higher parameter uncertainty. The uncertainty in the beta factors is particularly relevant regarding the risk exposures of equity markets to the oil price fluctuations, as the literature does not provide clear evidence on the response of stock market returns to oil price fluctuations. Building on investors’ ambiguity aversion and the vast literature that links oil and stock market dynamics, Chen and Demirer (2021) examine the asset pricing implications of oil beta uncertainty in a cross-section of the global stock market returns. The authors define the measure of oil beta uncertainty for a given stock market as the total range spanned by the 95% confidence interval for estimated oil betas. To verify whether the oil beta uncertainty carries a significant risk premium, they propose a zero-investment trading strategy that buys high oil beta uncertainty stock markets and simultaneously sells those with low oil beta uncertainty. Such a strategy yields a statistically significant return of 0.81% per month that cannot be explained by market beta, idiosyncratic volatility, or momentum.

Fundamental reason
The literature provides strong evidence that the oil price fluctuations drive stock market returns. However, the sign and magnitude of the response of the global stock markets to oil price fluctuations, i.e., oil beta, are uncertain. Therefore, the uncertainty surrounding how stock markets respond to oil price fluctuations represents a risk factor that global investors can’t fully diversify away. Accordingly, rational, ambiguity-averse investors would require a risk premium on stock markets that experience greater uncertainty in how they respond to oil price fluctuations (i.e., oil beta uncertainty). Consistent with the information uncertainty-based model of Barry and Brown (1985, 1986), investors require a premium for holding assets with higher parameter uncertainty.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 79 stock markets that are included in the stock market classification list maintained by the MSCI. A complete list of the traded countries’ stock markets can be found in the Appendix, Table A1. Each month t, using the data over months t-1 to t-24, run the regression of the excess return for the stock market i in month t (dependant variable) on the excess return for the aggregate world market index in month t and return on Brent crude oil in month t (independent variables) as indicated by equation 2. Represent the aggregate world market index by the MSCI World index and compute the excess returns using the three-month U.S. Treasury Bill rate. To avoid issues related to foreign exchange volatility, calculate all returns in USD. Next, using the point estimates of beta parameters and the corresponding standard errors obtained for each stock market, compute the 95% confidence interval of the estimated oil beta values. Finally, calculate the measure of the oil beta uncertainty for stock market i in month t as a difference between the highest and lowest 95% confidence interval values for the estimated loading on oil return for month t as displayed in equation 3. Each month, sort the country stock markets in the investment universe into equally-weighted quintile portfolios based on the estimated oil beta uncertainly values. The trading rule for the strategy is as follows: each month, buy the quintile with the highest oil beta uncertainty countries and sell the quintile with the lowest oil beta uncertainty countries. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Indifferent results. Presented strategies should perform well in various regimes.

Further extending the analysis to the pre- and post-global financial crisis does not yield any changes in their findings and confirm that oil price exposure of global equity markets does not necessarily capture a risk premium in global equity returns.