Commodity futures markets facilitate risk transfer from those who want to hedge against future price fluctuations to those who are willing to assume it. For instance, commodity producers take net short positions in the futures market to hedge their long positions in the physical commodity market. Such “hedging pressure” tends to drive down futures prices relative to expected spot prices and provides hedging premiums to counterparties such as speculators. While the literature has studied hedging pressure extensively in commodity futures markets, it has paid comparatively much less attention to commodity options markets. A novel study by Cheng, Tang and Yan (2021) complements the literature on futures hedging premiums and examines the hedging pressure in commodity options. The paper defines the hedging pressure in options (HPO) as commercial traders’ net short option exposure to the commodity, scaled by option open interest. To test the predictive relationship between the HPO and the commodity option returns in the cross-section, authors consider a trading strategy that simultaneously buys calls, sells puts, and delta-hedges with the underlying futures contract. Study results have shown that returns of such strategy monotonically increase with higher commodity HPO, confirming the existence of hedging premiums in the commodity options markets. A trading strategy is providing liquidity to the hedging demand by buying calls and selling puts for the highest HPO commodities, and buying puts and selling calls for the lowest HPO commodities earns an average return of 6.41% per month.

Fundamental reason
If a hedging premium exists in the commodity options markets, greater HPO should positively predict the returns to providing liquidity to option hedging demand. In particular, greater values of hedging pressure imply that puts are expensive and/or calls are cheap compared to lower values of hedging pressure. When HPO is high, producers who buy put options drive up the put prices in the presence of frictions and limited risk-sharing capacity of speculators who take the other side, and producers who sell calls analogously drive down call prices. Conversely, when HPO is low and negative, processors who sell put options drive down the put prices, while processors who buy call options drive up call prices. Therefore, a trading strategy buying calls and selling puts for the highest HPO commodities, and buying puts and selling calls for the lowest HPO commodities should earn abnormal returns since it provides liquidity to both types of hedging demand.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 24 commodity options and their underlying futures contracts. A complete list of traded commodity options is described in Appendix A. Apply the following filters to the options universe. First, include only the standard option contracts with the same maturity months as the underlying futures contracts. Second, eliminate option prices that violate no-arbitrage boundary conditions. Third, discard options that have Black’s (1976) implied volatilities less than 1%. Last, remove options in the last week before expiration. Using the data from the Commitments of Traders (COT) reports, infer hedgers’ positions in options in week t that are long the underlying commodity i by taking the futures-and-option-combined long positions of commercial traders and subtracting their futures-only long position. Analogously, infer hedgers’ positions in options that are short the underlying commodity. Finally, compute the option interest as the futures-and-option-combined open interest minus futures-only open interest. For each commodity i in week t, calculate the hedging pressure in options (HPO) as the net short option position of the hedgers divided by the option open interest (see equation 1). At the end of each Tuesday, rank the 24 commodities in ascending order based on their HPO and form five equal-weighted quantile portfolios consisting of 5, 5, 4, 5, 5 commodities, respectively. The trading rule for the strategy is as follows: at the end of Tuesday of week t, buy (sell) the delta-hedged OTM calls and sell (buy) the delta-hedged OTM puts for commodities in the highest (lowest) quintile (see equation 5). Categorize an option as out-of-the-money (OTM) if its absolute delta is between 0.125 and 0.375 and recompute the option’s delta weekly, every Tuesday (see equations 2,3,4). Hold the position for four weeks and then rebalance.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Albeit the paper does not explicitly states whether the strategy could be used as a hedge, it probably could be since it is a different asset class (active commodity strategies are commonly unrelated to the equity market cycles).

