China has the world’s second-largest stock market, helping to finance an economy that some predict will be the world’s largest within a decade. China also has political and economic environments quite different from those in the US and other developed economies. Specifically, individual investors contribute about 80% of the total trading volume. Therefore it is crucial to examine how well asset pricing models perform in China. However, Fama and French’s 3-factor model, which is one of the most prominent models for pricing US stocks, doesn’t work quite well for Chinese stocks.
In this paper, a 4-factor model consisting of the market, size, value, and trend is introduced. The first three factors are conceptually those of LSY-3 (a modified FF3 model in the Chinese market), and the trend factor is designed to account for the large trading volume by individual investors in China. As typical long-term momentum strategies do not perform well since individual investors are more short-term orientated in China, a new approach had to be applied. The authors constructed a trend factor specific to China by letting the data determine the weights on both price and volume information. Moreover, the trend factor is designed to summarize the impact of past price and volume trends on future expected stock returns succinctly.
The presented 4-factor model improves the state of art models with greater explanatory power. The model can also explain all reported pricing anomalies in China, including those not captured by LSY-3 or LSY-4, such as turnover, reversal, illiquidity, and idiosyncratic volatility.
Further, it also excels in explaining mutual fund returns with smaller aggregate pricing errors than LSY-3 and LSY-4. As there is no momentum factor in China, the 4-factor model is perfect to use as an analogue of Carhart’s (1997) 4-factor model for Chinese mutual funds. Last but not least, the Sharpe ratio of the 4-factor model is substantially higher than other factor models constructed with the same method, indicating that the 4-factor model has greater explanatory power regardless of the test assets used for model evaluation.
Naturally, the trend factor can also be a base of a profitable trading strategy, which is the main interest of this screener’s addition.

Fundamental reason
The driving force behind the trend factor is explained by extending the equilibrium model of Han, Zhou, and Zhu (2016). Model calibration shows that the trend factor performance increases with the volatility of noise trader demand. Consequently, this finding suggests that noise trading is the key force driving the trend factor. Empirically, the results consistently show that the trend factor is stronger in stocks with higher retail investor participation and with greater noise trader demand fluctuation.
As mentioned before, China has environments quite different from those in the U.S. and other developed economies. Individual investors contribute about 80% of the total trading volume. As a result, the volume level is staying at around 50%. Also, the contribution of volume to the trend factor is significantly greater in stocks with higher volume volatility. The results show that the volume trend substantially improves the pricing ability in China, while the benefit in the U.S. is very limited. It is consistent with the earlier results of the greater role that volume plays in China and is consistent with the model.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese A-share stocks with common shares from the WIND database, listed in the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. Exclude the smallest 30% of stocks. Stocks are firstly sorted by size into five quintile groups. From now on, consider only the highest size quintile.
First, construct the moving average (MA) price signals of stock i with lag L in month t as MP, where day d is the last trading day in month t, L the lag length, and Pti,d the closing price of stock i on day d. Consider the MA signals with lag lengths of 3-, 5-, 10-, 20-, 50-, 100-, 200-, 300-, and 400-days. They reflect daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, 1-year, and 2-year price trends. To use the MA signals to predict returns, normalize the MA price signals by the closing price on the last trading day for stationarity. Secondly, to capture volume trends, define the MA of the volume of stock i with lag L in month t as where Vti,d is the trading volume of stock i on day d by using the daily renminbi (RMB) trading volume. Then normalize the MA of the volume by the trading volume on day d. Thirdly, using signals on both price and volume, each month run the predictive cross-sectional regression with intercept. The return for each stock i at month t is the independent variable, and the signals at time t-1 are dependent variables (equation 5). Lastly, compute the expected return in the following month (t+1) based on the trend signals at month t and forecasting coefficients. Each forecasting coefficient is equal to an exponential moving average of the past coefficients (betas), using “lambda” of 0.02 (equation 7). Finally, the expected return is equal to the sums of multiplications of each factor and corresponding forecasting coefficient (equation 6).
As the last step, sort the stocks into trend quintiles based on their expected return. Among the highest size decile, long the highest trend quintile and short the lowest trend quintile. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It is a long-short equity strategy