Momentum, one of the oldest and best-known trading strategies, states that stocks that have performed well in the past (“winners”) are likely to continue to perform well. Conversely, stocks that have performed poorly (“losers”) would continue in this trend. On the other hand, the “52-week high effect” states that stocks with prices near the 52-week highs have better future returns than those far from the 52-week highs.

Medhat and Schmeling (2022) documented that momentum is strongly evident in one-month stock returns for stocks with relatively high turnover. The authors (Chen, Stivers, and Sun) extended the research by utilizing a stock’s price to its 52-week-high ratio (PTH). They concluded that going long past winners with high PTH and going short past winners with low PTH should be profitable. Finally, they created a strategy telling us to triple-sort portfolios on past return, PTH, and share turnover.

Fundamental reason
Momentum strategies are widely known and well-accepted among academics. The main reasons for their functioning are the irrationality of investors, behavioral biases like investor herding, or confirmation bias. However, the “52-week high effect” is caused by anchoring bias creating errors among investors. According to the authors (Chen, Stivers, and Sun), the investor’s reaction to news for stocks trading near a 52-week high might be pessimistic (downward biased), and stocks trading far below a 52-week high might be optimistic (upward biased). Therefore, the high price to the 52-week-high ratio (PTH) in month t suggests a positive influence on returns in month t+1, whereas the low PTH indicates a reversal in the month t+1. In conclusion, the authors propose combining the two strategies – momentum and 52-week high to create an even more effective strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all AMEX, NYSE, and NASDAQ stocks with share codes 10 and 11. Stocks with prices below 1$ and financial firms are excluded. The data come from CRSP. Firstly, at the end of month t, sort stocks into quintiles based on their return in month t, using NYSE breakpoints – the first quintile represents “Winners”, and the last quintile represents “Losers”. Secondly, sort stocks based on their price to 52-week high ratio (PTH) at the end of month t-1. As the third step, sort stocks into quintiles based on their turnover over month t. Finally, for month t+1, construct two value-weighted portfolios using a sequential sorting procedure on the abovementioned three factors. For the first portfolio, go long Hight-PTH Winners and go short Low-PTH Winners in the lowest turnover quintile. For the second portfolio, go long High PTH-Winners and go short Low-PTH Winners in the highest turnover quintile. Create an equally-weighted portfolio consisting of the two strategies.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -