Investor sentiment is the general attitude of the investors to the given stock. It’s a psychological factor expressing how people feel about the market or a given company. Institutional investors don’t tend to be swayed in their decisions by things like “a general feeling.” At the same time, this is more common for the individuals trading on the stock market, especially in China, where there are many inexperienced retail investors. Therefore strategies based on sentiment measures might be good price predictors.
Lin and Qiu (2021) ask themselves this exact question: can investor sentiment predict future stock prices in China? They find that contrary to the US market if they construct sentiment beta, which expresses how sensitive are the stock returns in relation to the market sentiment, they find that low sentiment beta stocks outperform high sentiment beta stocks. The authors show these results on a large sample of Chinese A-share stocks with sentiment indicator taken from CICSI. Naturally, based on this, it is possible to construct a simple profitable long-short strategy.

Fundamental reason
As we have surely mentioned in other strategies and articles, the stock market in China has presumably different characteristics as, say, western stock markets. It’s been rapidly developing in recent years, and a large part of the market is not comprised of institutional investors but individual retail investors. These are often far less informed and professional in their decisions, thus creating space for different market anomalies, which aren’t present in the US market, or sometimes it’s the exact opposite of what happens in the US market. One of the examples of this is sentiment trading. So, the strategy is profitable mainly because retail investors dominate the Chinese stock market and often make “irrational” sentiment-based decisions. Subsequently, the sentiment creates different conditions in the market, which are easier to exploit thanks to the availability of an index measuring the stock sentiment (CICSI).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of China A-Share stocks. Sentiment beta is calculated according to the regression in section 2.2 of the paper. For a given stock in a given month, the variables for the equation are market factor, size factor, value factor, momentum factor and the sentiment index from CICSI. Data for other factors in the paper were taken from CSMAR. Sentiment beta is the coefficient associated with the sentiment index variable. Regression is calibrated on data from previous 36 months, with at least 24 valid observations. Sort the stocks according to their sentiment beta into quintiles. Long the lowest quintile, short the highest. Strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Although the strategy is not directly examined as a possible hedge, there are several reasons why it might be atleast slightly crisis-proof. The strategy has negative correlation to the market factor and also negative beta (Table 5 and Table 6). However, more detailed analysis should be performed.