The value effect is one of the most known anomalies and is academically well documented. It states that value stocks (stocks with low P/B ratios) outperform growth stocks (high P/B). Value stocks beat growth stocks in long horizons, but the value anomaly (like any anomaly) could have its harsh times when everything is the other way around, and growth stocks outperform value stocks. Market practitioners and academics have noticed that value works better during market downturns, bear markets, and in times with high volatility and market uncertainty. But growth stocks often shine during strong market growth in bull markets with small volatility. Traders and investors have always been looking for ways to differentiate between the market phases favoring each type of stock and to alternate between them as the market migrates from one state to another. There have been several different studies and approaches to distinguish between these market phases. It is possible to use momentum factors, sentiment indicators, macro-economic indicators, and many others. We present an academic paper with the simple approach of using the VIX index and the Put-Call ratio (which both measures fear among market participants) to time value and growth stocks. This anomaly is strongly related to market capitalization as large-capitalization stocks (low risk) are used to outperforming small-capitalization stocks (high risk) during bear markets or in times of stress (the same way as value outperforms growth). Therefore a lot of studies also differentiate between large value, small value, large growth, and small growth stocks in their rotational systems.

Fundamental reason
Growth stocks have a higher earnings growth than value stocks, while value stocks carry greater current earnings yield than growth stocks. When noise traders are bullish, they may overestimate future earnings growth, and thus give more weight to the expected earnings growth than the current earnings yield. Consequently, they may allocate a greater proportion of their portfolio to growth stocks. It means that by the time it is detected that investor sentiment has been shifted to bullishness, growth stocks have already been overbought and value stocks oversold. One consequence is that growth stocks would now be relatively overvalued, while value stocks would be relatively undervalued.
In contrast, when noise traders are bearish, they may underestimate the future earnings growth, and focus more on the current earnings yield. In such a circumstance, they may favor value stocks over growth stocks. By the time it is found that investor sentiment has shifted to bearishness, value stocks have already been overbought, and growth stocks oversold. As a result, value stocks would now be relatively overpriced, and growth stocks would be relatively underpriced. The reasoning above suggests a simple investment strategy to invest in growth stocks when investor sentiment measures indicate a shift from bullishness to bearishness and value stocks when they reveal a change from bearishness to bullishness. The Put-Call Ratio and VIX index could be used as a measure of investment sentiment.

Simple trading strategy
The measure of investment sentiment is the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) equity put-call ratio and the market volatility (VIX) index. The investment universe contains all stocks on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ (in the complex version of this system). Stocks are then sorted into deciles based on a size measure and then sorted into quintiles based on the P/B ratio inside each size portfolio. The investor uses only the first three size deciles for the trading system (to avoid potential problems with small illiquid stocks), so he/she isn’t capitalizing on small/large discrepancies in this version of the trading system. The investor then goes long on an equally weighted portfolio consisting of value stocks (the lowest P/B quintile) from the top three size deciles (large-cap stocks) and short on growth stocks (the highest P/B quintile) from the top three size deciles (large-cap stocks) for three months if, simultaneously, the CBOE put-call ratio is lower than its six-month average, and the VIX index is lower than its six-month average.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Strategy’s goal is to hold equity long-short portfolio only in positive times (low risk and low volatility times) and be out of equities; otherwise, it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops.