(Gala, Pagliardi, Shaliastovich, Zenios, December 2023) present outstanding empirical methodology for measuring political risk and constructing political portfolios and factors within and across asset classes. In their sense, political risk is “everywhere”. Using political ratings of individual countries, they provide evidence of priced global political risk across and within the equity, bond, and FX markets. In our rare triple strategy selection (for all mainstream accepted asset classes), we would focus on returns in global USD currency. In the sneak peek, portfolios monthly sorted on different political risk ratings in international equity, bond, and FX markets are carrying statistically significant returns with acceptable complexity to be deployed for skilled practitioners.

Fundamental reason
The paper contributes to the “everywhere” empirical asset pricing literature that studies the economic determinants of risk affecting financial markets across asset classes. Remarkably, the political risk factor manifests itself in all the asset classes and proxies and can be meaningfully extracted from any of those. The asset- or ranking-specific information does not materially alter its importance. Consistently with a standard APT interpretation, our GPSZ model, which consists of the global market and political risk factor, can successfully price a large panel of international asset returns within and across stocks, bonds, and currencies and within and across four alternative political risk ratings. Assets of countries with low political ratings earn higher average returns because they load more on global political risk. The global multi-asset P-factor carries a statistically significant risk premium of 4.44% per annum, with a t-statistic well above the critical threshold of three and a Sharpe ratio 0.70. The global political risk factor further predicts global economic growth. It correlates with macroeconomic and business cycle variables, capturing first- and second-moment effects such as a recession dummy, cross-country capital flows, global volatility, global risk aversion, and global economic policy uncertainty. This evidence helps economically interpret the asset-pricing framework, in which the P-factor is associated with systematically good news about the economy. An asset that is positively exposed to the factor and under-performs in adverse economic times is risky and earns a positive risk premium. Given the pervasive nature of global political risk in financial markets, promising avenues for further research would undoubtedly include economic models to micro-found the sources of global political risk and its connections to the economy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 42 countries [equity indexes investment vehicles] classified by MSCI, 23 developed and 23 emerging markets (excluding those without WES data) (Indonesia, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Singapore).
(The data are available at https://www.prsgroup.com/explore-our-products/countrydata-online/ (ICRG, subscription required) and https://databank.worldbank.org/reports.aspx?Report_Name=WGI-Table&Id=ceea4d8b (World Bank, free access). WES data are accessible in Datastream.)

“Combo” refers to an equally-weighted portfolio of the univariate sorts on all these political risk ratings (“ICRG” denotes the political risk ratings of the International Country Risk Guide, “Politics” and “Policy” refer to, respectively, the political stability and economic policy ratings provided by IfO WES, “WB” are the political instability ratings created by the World Bank).
0. Sort the countries in each risk metric portfolio into quantiles.
1. Perform the long-short spread portfolio (high versus low political risk countries). “P1 (L)” refers to the bottom, and “P4 (H)” refers to the top quintiles. (Adverse downward move in the factor can reflect the bad news for the high political risk group (long leg) and/or high return for the low-risk group (short leg)).

ICRG and combo portfolios are rebalanced monthly, while WES portfolios are semi-annual and World Bank portfolios are annual. They are all meant to make a (⅓) equally-based portfolio.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - We go long countries with a high political risk, therefore, the strategy is not a crisis risk.