Salience theory was first described in 2012 by Bordalo et al. It is a theory of choice under a risk, which describes investor behavior. The basic idea is that investors, especially retail investors who are more prone to be influenced by sentiment, tend to prefer investments that have salient upside, which means those that have a larger payoff compared to the average of all the other alternatives. On a large scale, this leads to price reversal, which is used to construct this strategy.
Cai and Zhao (2022) extend previous research on salience theory, which was previously focused on equities, to cryptocurrencies. They find that the presence of this salience theory effect is especially strong when the uncertainty in other markets is relatively low. The salience effect in the crypto market is the strongest salience effect recorded. The relative return salience measure is constructed in this strategy as the difference between the salient weighted probability and the objective probability. It can be used to create a profitable long-short strategy in the crypto market.

Fundamental reason
The cryptocurrency market behaves in many ways differently than the other markets. One significant difference is that it is dominated by retail investors, which leads to the amplification of certain effects present in other markets. As the salience theory effect is present mainly when uncertainty is high, and there are many not so sophisticated investors trading, it is no surprise that the theory holds an explanative power for the investor behavior in the crypto market. It is the result of insufficient objective information, and many might fall victim to various advertisements and scams going on in this space. Simply put, more traders are prone to be affected by the community or trends, highlighting certain cryptocurrencies which then gain salient upside. When the market returns to equilibrium, this creates a price reversal, which is captured by this trading strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all cryptocurrencies with a market cap of over $1 million; the data in the research were obtained from the website coinmarketcap.com.
The strategy is sorted into quintiles according to the Salience Measure (ST) parameter of each crypto.
To calculate the ST parameter for a given cryptocurrency, first, the salience of the return for a given day needs to be calculated. This is essentially its distance from the average return of all cryptos in the market on that day, calculated according to equation (1) on page 14. Once this is done for all cryptocurrencies, rank them in descending order. Said rank is used in equation (2) on page 15 to obtain salience weight for given crypto on a given day.
Lastly, the obtained values are used to calculate the ST, which is measured by the covariance of decision (salience) weights and the crypto returns over the estimation period, as in equation (3) on page 15.
Sort the portfolio into quintiles, long the lowest quintile, short the highest. The strategy is value-weighted.