It is a well-accepted fact that there is a positive relationship between risk and expected stock returns. Illiquid stocks are considered as difficult to sell and may give rise to large losses when the investors cannot sell when they want to. Consequently, risk-averse investors demand extra compensation in the form of subsequent high returns to hold risky illiquid assets. The cross-sectional relationship between various illiquidity measures and stock returns has been well-documented. This paper contributes to the literature by decomposing firm-specific monthly-varying illiquidity measure into two components: systematic liquidity and idiosyncratic liquidity.
Firstly, the firm-level cross-sectional relationship between systematic illiquidity and stock returns are documented. Systematic illiquidity predicts one-month-ahead stock returns positively, but the observed relationship is relatively weak. The contribution of this novel research is that the cross-sectional relationship between idiosyncratic (il)liquidity and subsequent stock returns is analyzed. The results are clear and can be used as a base of a profitable trading strategy. Since high idiosyncratic liquidity stocks significantly outperform low idiosyncratic liquidity stocks.

Fundamental reason
When sentiment-driven irrational investors dominate the financial market, the market becomes abnormally liquid, and as a result, overvalued. Introducing the cross-sectional relationship between liquidity shocks and stock returns, its shown that investors underreact to positive and negative liquidity shocks. Hence, stocks that exhibit positive (negative) liquidity shocks generate positive (negative) subsequent returns.
Systematic liquidity can be considered as a comovement of a stock’s liquidity with the market liquidity. Study shows that individual firm´s liquidity is at least partly determined by marketwide factors and it arises due to publicly available marketwide information flow. On the other hand, idiosyncratic liquidity is the component that cannot be explained by marketwide liquidity movements. Earnings announcements and other firm-specific news are major source of idiosyncratic liquidity. Systematic illiquidity is positively priced in the cross-section of stock returns only when very small stocks are included. Conversely, as opposed to the risk-return trade-off, there is a positive (negative) relationship between idiosyncratic (il)liquidity and subsequent stock returns. A zero-cost high-low value(equal)-weighted idiosyncratic liquidity strategy generates positive and significant risk-adjusted returns for up to three months in the future. This evidence implies that investors tend to underreact to idiosyncratic liquidity component.
Moreover, observations came to the conclusions that the predictive power of idiosyncratic liquidity on future stock returns are robust to various firm-level characteristics and risk factors, and the positive (negative) relationship between idiosyncratic liquidity and stock returns is more pronounced among stocks with low institutional ownership, low analyst coverage, small market capitalization, and low illiquidity.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). Stocks are required to have at least 15 trading days within a month to be included in the sample.

Firstly, use illiquidity (ILLIQ) measure proposed by Amihud (2002). Daily illiquidity is quantified as the ratio of daily absolute stock return scaled by its daily dollar trading volume. A stock’s monthly illiquidity measure is computed as the average of its daily illiquidity within a month. Then, construct a marketwide illiquidity index by taking value-weighted averages of firm-specific illiquidity of all stocks in the CRSP universe (equation 1).

Then, using marketwide illiquidity measure, estimate firm-level monthly-varying systematic (as the beta of the model multiplied by the market illiquidity) and idiosyncratic illiquidity (residuals of the model) measures from the univariate monthly rolling regressions (with intercept) of illiquidity measure on the marketwide illiquidity index over a 36-month fixed window. Construct systematic and idiosyncratic liquidity measures as opposite signs of systematic and idiosyncratic illiquidity measures. Lastly, sort stocks into deciles based on their idiosyncratic liquidity measure. The investor takes a long position in high idiosyncratic liquidity decile and a short position in low idiosyncratic liquidity decile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - According to the paper, the strategy should work also during Low Sentiment periods, but with a lower return