Time series reversal is a new type of double-sorted trading strategy. Aa interesting academic paper written by Liu and Papailias examines a reversal pattern in the time series context from 12 to 24 months after the formation of trend following signals. They decompose the trend following strategy returns according to their subsequent performance. They show that the sub-portfolio which consists of “loser” instruments in a trend following strategy which later shows positive returns, i.e. the “fault losers”, continue to provide a significant alpha which is immune to momentum risks. Fault loser strategy also displays lower volatility and a lower maximum drawdown than the other trend-following strategies.

Fundamental reason
The rationality of momentum and reversal is linked with a number of well-known behavioural theories. Rationales behind are related to the short-term under-reaction and delayed over-reaction. Time series reversal is caused by a security’s own time-series autocorrelation rather than cross-sectional correlation. It is also believed that there is a certain linkage between the time series continuation and the time series reversal.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 24 commodity futures, nine foreign exchange futures, nine equity indexes of developed countries, and 13 government bonds for six developed countries. Firstly, monthly returns are calculated from the daily excess cumulative return series. Then, the investor uses monthly SMA (simple moving average) to calculate the trend following signals (winner/loser) based on returns during months T-23 to T-12 for each individual instrument. Then it is observed if the SMAs of T-23 to T-12 period excess returns during the next 12 months (T-11 to T) are positive or not. The investor than in month T+1 picks and holds all futures which had negative SMA signal based on calculation during months T-23 to T-12 and at the same time experiencing positive returns during months T-11 to T (futures in this sub-portfolio are called “Fault Losers”). Trading signals are generated every month, and position sizes are rebalanced every month. Investor employs annualised ex-ante volatility method to scale the returns of each asset while using 40% critical value for the annual volatility.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Futures trend-following/momentum strategies are a cornerstone of trend-following CTA funds and as such is an excellent candidate for an uncorrelated strategy and very often a hedge to equity market factor. The source research paper doesn’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; however, we can expect that strategy will probably retain a negative correlation to equities. Backtest would be helpful to determine correlation and hedging characteristics.