There is a natural tendency for investors to replace part of their risky portfolios for safer assets in times of uncertainty. Recent research illustrates a way to adjust the optimal bond fraction (which is a substitute for cash) based on whether the market is bullish or bearish; the strategy (called Protective Asset Allocation, or just PAA) distinguishes between “good” and “bad” assets based on the momentum indicator over a certain lookback period. Then, during bear markets, the number of good assets decreases (more assets for which MOM<=0) and bond fraction increases, and contrariwise during bull markets. The bond fraction is further dependent on the so-called protection rate; the higher the protection rate (0, 1, or 2), the higher the bond fraction for the same number of good assets. The authors found the strategy with the highest protection factor (referred to as PAA2) to considerably outperform the basic 60/40 strategy and doing so with much lower volatility and maximum drawdown. Moreover, although simple dual-momentum strategy achieves a higher raw return, it comes at the cost of higher drawdowns and volatility, resulting in a lower Sharpe ratio than in the case of proposed PAA2.

Fundamental reason
The strategy offers higher protection during bear markets than traditional dual-momentum strategy, as it tends to move a higher proportion of funds into low-risk assets. Then, even if the PAA strategy underperforms the traditional dual-momentum in terms of raw returns, it tends to achieve much better risk characteristics, i.e. markedly lower drawdowns and standard deviations.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 12 ETFs in different asset classes, namely: US equity (SPY, QQQ, IWM); advanced countries’ equity, represented by Europe and Japan (VGK, EWJ); emerging market equity (EEM); alternative assets, including commodities, gold and REITs (GSG, GLD and IYR, respectively); and “risky” bonds (HYG, LQD, TLT). “Safe bonds” are represented by intermediate US Treasuries (IEF). Firstly, the investor separates good assets from bad based on the momentum indicator with 12-month lookback period (formula (1), page 4), where good assets are the ones with MOM>0. Then he calculates the bond fraction (formula (2), page 6) with protection factor a=2. The investor then picks top 6 (or less if less than 6 meet the condition of MOM>0) of the good assets to compose the risky part of the portfolio. The share of risky assets will be calculated as (1-BF)/BF, and the assets in this portfolio are weighted equally.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The selected strategy is a class of “Tactical asset allocation” strategies like the one proposed by Mebane Faber in his famous paper “A Quantitative Approach to Tactical Asset Allocation”. The selected strategy contains equities and TAA strategy tries to rotate out of them during the time of stress. Therefore the proposed strategy isn’t mainly used as an add-on to the portfolio to hedge equity risk directly. Still, it is more an overlay which can be used to manage the percentual representation of equities (or “equity-like assets”) in a portfolio. Tactical asset allocation framework can decrease the overall risk of equities in a portfolio, and it can improve the risk-adjusted returns.