Earnings announcement premium represents a widely-documented market anomaly that expects stocks to earn higher returns during the period of earnings announcements, as they carry higher risk. The reported earnings of firms are not only a reflection of the firm-specific performance, but are also influenced by the aggregate market factors as shocks to aggregate cash flows, which represent the systematic risk component of earnings innovation. Therefore, when earnings for a particular firm are released, the investors not only adjust their valuation for the stock of this particular firm, but also for other related firms and the rest of the stock market. This causes a higher co-movement between stock returns of firms that announce earnings and overall market returns, while the excess market beta during the earnings announcements period is a reflection of the extent of systematic risk component in firms’ earnings innovation.
The research on the systematic earnings announcement risk has been recently expanded by Jingjing Chen et al. (2020). Under traditional asset pricing theory, one would expect any kind of risk to be priced in stocks continuously. However, the study provides evidence that the premium caused by systematic earnings announcement risk is not priced-in consistently but rather in response to significant events as earnings announcements. As the stocks with a higher beta to market return during the earnings announcement period carry higher systematic risk, the presented strategy creates a portfolio of stocks that are expected to accrue the premium. Therefore, it puts the stocks with high(low) earnings annoucement beta on the long(short) side and such strategy has earned 0,62 monthly return from 1982 to 2017.

Fundamental reason
The authors address this anomaly to investors’ way of processing information. They argue that most of the time, the investors process all available information and update the stock valuation when new significant information is published. As investors process and trade on new significant information, the price of the stock is efficiently updated, and the risk premium is accrued.
Their arguments are supported by further findings that the relation between future stock returns and earnings announcement beta is higher for firms with higher earnings uncertainty, proxied by the standard deviation of historical earnings surprises. Also, the researchers provide evidence that the premium is significantly larger for early announcers. As their earnings provide insight into the extent of systematic risk, the price of late announcers is already adjusted to the extent of systematic risk before their earnings announcement.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks with CRSP share code of 10, 11, 12, 18, 48 and 72. ADRs, ETFs and closed funds are excluded. At the beginning of each month, when portfolios are created, filter the investment universe only to those stocks that are expected to announce earnings in the respective month. The earnings announcement days are obtained from IBES and Compustat. If the announcement occurs after 4. p.m. ET, adjust the announcement date “t” to the next trading date. M&A announcement dates are obtained from Securities Data Corporation (SDC) platinum. Consider only deals with transaction worth more than $1 million. Also, consider only transactions where the acquirer previously owned less than 50% of the target company.
For each stock in such a filtered investment universe, estimate the stock’s beta to market return during the stock’s “announcement window”. To estimate this beta, run rolling 3-year regression of stock’s daily return in excess of risk-free rate on excess market return, but only for daily returns during the “announcement window”. This window is characterized as a 3-day window consisting of the day “t” (+-1) when the firm announces earnings or makes an announcement regarding M&A. Supposing that particular firm has not made any M&A announcement during the last 3 years, the stock’s beta to market return is then estimated based on 36 observations of daily returns. (12 earnings announcement windows).
Once the betas are estimated, sort the filtered universe by betas and go long(short) on the quintile of stocks with the highest(lowest) beta. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy goes long high beta stocks.