The author implemented textual analysis to construct the Fiscal News Index based on an extensive historical sample of U.S. President speeches. Comments on taxes and the stimulus of the economy can provide invaluable insight into the future of fiscal policies. FNI quantifies political risk, and spikes in its value are linked with an increased likelihood of a recession up to 3 months ahead; therefore, it can be considered a leading indicator of recession. Based on the paper and presentation of the factor’s predictability power, we propose a helpful strategy that will utilize reasonable investment resource allocation in times of economic uncertainty.

Fundamental reason
Topics of political influences on stock markets are widely and well-researched, and many influential papers from the last 20 years are cited. The president is likely to propose fiscal policy changes during unfavorable economic conditions. Depending on presidential speeches, which are closely watched by the public and private sectors, and implications from policymakers, an investor following this strategy can select sensitive stocks and target them to both long (buy) and short (sell) sides. Empirical findings suggest that this index is a risk factor priced in the cross-section of stock returns. Investors demand higher expected excess returns for stocks with high exposure to Fiscal News as they are deemed riskier.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX, and the Nasdaq stock exchanges. Author collects a large sample of speeches (i.e., news conferences, interviews, state of Union speeches, remarks, radio speeches, and oral addresses) of U.S. presidents from February 1929 to December 2020. Fiscal News Index is constructed using the latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) algorithm as the average of the proportion of Topic 0 (Fiscal Topic) in all paragraphs of President speeches during the month. The absolute value of β^FN_i,t estimated from logit regressions equation (1) where Recession_t is the dummy (dependant) variable which is equal to 1 if quarter t is the recession quarter defined by NBER and 0 otherwise, and the independent variable (predictor) FN_t−1 is the Fiscal News Index in quarter t-1. Time-series regressions using a 60-month rolling window in equation (3) calculate (dependant) excess return on stock i in month t from predictor FN_t (FNI in month t) and another control (independent) variables which are Mkt, SMB, HML, and Mom factors of mentioned stock from French data library; Following slope coefficient β used in following portfolio construction is estimated from this equation. In each month, the investor first sorts stocks into quintiles based on their exposure to Fiscal News Index (absolute value of β^FN_i,t), where quintile 1 (5) contains stocks with the lowest (highest) β^FN_i,t in the previous month. Then, the final High-Low portfolio with a long position in the high absolute beta portfolio (P5) and a short position in the low absolute beta portfolio (P1) is formed. Finally, all portfolios are value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The index spiked mostly during the recession, which is expected as the president should be more likely to announce changes in fiscal policy to support the economy when unfavorable economic conditions are unfavorable. The peak of the index was recorded at the beginning of the sample, during the occurrence of the worst economic downturn throughout the sample. Therefore, various applications of strategies based on paper can be used to mitigate risks of bear markets.