Value investing has a long history dating back to Graham and Dodd (1934), and since then has attracted a lot of attention from academics and investment practitioners alike. The main principle of value investing is to maximize the difference between the stock’s intrinsic value and the price paid to purchase it. The value investor assumes that the stock is just temporarily mispriced and will eventually converge towards its intrinsic value. However, this investment strategy has recently faced great challenges due to its poor performance over the past two decades in the US. In the light of the diminishing value profits in the US, Feng et al. (2022) examine the effectiveness of value investment strategies in China’s A-shares market, the second largest and second most liquid stock market worldwide. The authors conduct a comprehensive analysis and consider multiple value metrics for both the valuation-based and the profitability-based strategies. In particular, they combine six valuation and profitability measures and construct a value-profit composite factor. The factor longs value and/or profitable firms and sells short growth and/or unprofitable firms. Such a combination of the valuation- and profitability-oriented approaches converges to one of the famous mottos of the legendary Warren Buffett: “Buy a great company at a fair price.” Over the sample period, the value-profit composite yielded an average monthly return of 0.70% (t = 3.89). This result suggests that the value investment strategy is still alive in China’s A-share market, delivering statistically and economically significant returns.

Fundamental reason
The main principle of value investing is to maximize the difference between the stock’s intrinsic value and the price paid to purchase it. One approach is to identify undervalued stocks using the valuation indicators, such as the book-to-market equity and earnings-to-price ratios. The strategy assumes that the undervalued stocks are just temporarily mispriced and will eventually converge towards their intrinsic values. The other approach is to pursue high-quality companies. Novy-Marx (2013) showed that firms with higher profitability generate significantly higher returns than less profitable firms. According to the q-theory with investment frictions, an expected stock return equals the expected marginal benefit of an investment divided by the current marginal cost of investment. Hence, the q-theory predicts that profitable firms should generate higher expected returns than unprofitable ones after holding the investment rate fixed since profitable firms have a higher marginal benefit of the investment. The proposed value-profit composite factor combines both valuation- and profitability-oriented approaches and, therefore, should be able to identify profitable companies that trade at a fair price.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese A-share stocks traded on the Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges. First, eliminate the smallest 30% of stocks based on their firm size at the end of the previous month. Second, construct three valuation measures, namely, gross-profit-to-market-equity, operating-profit-to-market-equity, and net-profit-to-market-equity ratios. Gross profit equals total revenue minus the cost of goods sold. Operating profit equals total revenue minus total operating expenses. Finally, net profit is calculated as total revenue minus total expenses plus gains minus losses. For all these valuation measures, market equity is the product of the month-end closing price and total outstanding shares owned by public investors (i.e., the free float). Third, construct three profitability measures, namely, gross-profit-to-total-assets, operating-profit-to-book-equity, and net-profit-to-book-equity. Book equity is defined as total shareholder equity minus the book value of preferred stocks. A detailed description of all variables used in the study can be found in Appendix Table A1. The firm-level financial information used in the valuation and profitability measures is collected from the most recent annual or semi-annual reports. Fourth, rank all eligible stocks based on each of the aforementioned valuation and profitability measures. Assign the high (low) rank to the value or profitable (growth or unprofitable) stocks. At the end of month t, sort the investment universe into two portfolios based on the firm size. Within the two size portfolios, further, break the stocks into three value-weighted portfolios based on the average ranking of each stock across all six valuation and profitability measures as follows: top 30%, medium 40%, and bottom 30%. The trading rule for the strategy is as follows: within each size portfolio, buy the top portfolio (value and/or profitable stocks) and sell the bottom portfolio (growth and/or unprofitable stocks). The portfolios are value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - it’s long only strategy.