Extend academic attention has been put on the institutional aspect of investing and researchers tend to avoid the significant base of individual investors. Individuals’ equity holdings provide us with valuable information that can be utilized in stocks pricing mechanisms. However, there is a restraint – the absence of long-term data. This novel paper solves this issue by scrutinizing 21 years of statistics regarding Norwegian retail holdings characteristics. The authors aimed to analyze the impact of age, wealth, and market factors on the stock cross-section payoffs.
While the market factor is nothing new, it was proved that equity portfolios arranged by the investors’ age or wealth generate significant factors assessing the financial value of stocks. Specifically, the factor model contains three determinants, namely a mature-minus-young factor, a high wealth-minus-low wealth factor, and lastly, the market factor. The paper proves that inexperienced young sentimental male investors lacking proper financial knowledge tend to diverge from the above-mentioned factors, therefore from the tangential portfolios. In contrast, older, rich, and more experienced stockholders are prone to hold more profitable instruments with higher market capitalization and lower betas while converging to the tangency portfolio resulting in higher CAPM alphas. These findings are supported by Koijen and Yogo (2019), demonstrating the direct relationships between company characteristics and U.S. equity holdings. To sum it up, those two novel factors (mature-minus-young and high wealth-minus-low wealth) form profitable strategies.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is simple. Mature individuals are usually more experienced; therefore, their investment strategies are prudently considered. Young and less wealthy market participants tend to act impulsively, which results in less profitable (risky) positions. Hence, the strategy of buying the instruments preferred by mature investors and simultaneously shorting the positions held by younger ones can lead to considerable payoffs. This finding is also backed by several studies, for example, Bach, Calvet, and Sodini (2020) and Fagereng et al. (2020). Moreover, the study scrutinizes 21 years of detailed data, which is significantly longer period than used in other papers concerning similar topics. The three-factor model also met the criteria of Fama and French (2018) bootstrap tests, showing a powerful out-of-sample performance. Lastly, the results are robust and supported by the additional use of traditional firm factors (size, value, investment, profitability, momentum) as a benchmark.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed on the the Oslo Stock Exchange. Stocks are sorted by age and by wealth (independently). The “age” variable is defined as the weighted average age of the individual stockholders of each firm at the end of the year. The “wealth” is defined as the weighted average of each company’s stockholder’s wealth bracket consisting of the investor’s liquid financial instruments, real estate, vehicles, and business assets, net of liabilities (the paper divides investors in to 12 brackets by their wealth because of the wealth distribution). For both factors (age and wealth), create three separate portfolios. The first portfolios include the lowest 30% of stocks, the second portfolios contain the stocks from the 30%-70% range, and finally, the third portfolios consist of the highest 30% of stocks. Go long on the high portfolios (third) and go short on the low portfolios (first). The strategies are rebalanced yearly and both are value-weighted. As we average the payoffs and volatility of both factors, it is suggested to invest equal amounts into both.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on Table VI, both strategies have negative CAPM beta of around -0.2. Hedging properties are also obvious from Figure 2.