The statement of standard asset pricing theory is clear – distressed stocks should yield higher returns. Despite this prediction, a number of studies have found a negative relationship between stock returns and default risk (see Dichev (1998) or Campbell et al. (2008)), leaving the issue open to further discussion. In their recent study, Aretz, Florackis and Kostakis (2017) examine default risk premium using bankruptcy filing data of firms from 14 developed countries. As a result, they find a strong positive relationship between stock returns and default risk in international markets. Firstly, this study uses non-US firms’ data regarding firm bankruptcy filings. Secondly, to calculate default probabilities, it uses reduced-form approach of Campbell et al. (2008) hazard model, which is proved to be more suitable for bankruptcy forecasting than Merton’s (1974) measure followed in different papers. Finally, the study shows that the premium gets more significant in countries where creditors are protected and shareholder bargaining power is low. As for country level, authors did not find any significant influence of overconfidence, stock market liquidity conditions or the quality of accounting standards on the premium. In conclusion, findings of Aretz, Florackis and Kostakis (2017) show that portfolio containing moderately distressed firms yields a relatively higher returns.

Fundamental reason
The strategy is examined with default risk expected to differ based on the cross-country variations. In countries where creditors are favorized and protected while shareholder bargaining power is low, higher default risk premium is required. It is because of lower ability of the latter to extract rents from creditors. Distressed firms, in which shareholder bargaining power is low, are riskier for shareholders and hence they yield a premium. The premium is higher in firms with high asset tangibility, as proposed by the shareholder advantage hypothesis of Garlappi et al. (2008). As for default risk decomposition, positive relation is found for its non-diversifiable part – systematic risk, rather than idiosyncratic risk。

Simple trading strategy
Data are sourced from commercial data providers, government institutions, stock exchanges, and other researchers. In some cases, data from multiple sources are merged to fit the length of the sample period. For the examined period of 2000-2014, authors run LOGIT models specific for each of the C14 countries and estimate out-of-sample default risks following adjusted Campbell indicator (Campbell et al. (2008)). This model specifies the probability of firm’s bankruptcy 12 months in advance, based on its survival in an intervening period of 11 months. Then, they sort the stocks according to the default risk estimated, and construct international quintile portfolios. Results show, that across all 14 countries, average premium is higher (lower) for high (low) default risk portfolios. Default risk premium is computed as the return of a following spread strategy: long the highest default risk quintile portfolio and short the lowest one. Returns are annualized and reported together with their t-statistics. Results are significant at 1% statistical significance level and hold for value-weighted portfolios.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - the lowest default risk quintile portfolio can provide a hedge against increases in aggregate default risk.