Rajan Raju (April 2023) provides clear evidence of the low-risk anomaly in the Indian equities market, using a large universe of firms over 15 years. Volatility-based metrics outperform beta-based portfolios in our observation period and equity universe. We have chosen a representative variant from this solid, thoughtful academy study of strategy portfolios built monthly on one of the four low-risk metrics (namely, 3-year [36-month] realized volatility [VOL_36M]) developed by a sole scientist.

Fundamental reason
The factor construction plays an essential role in the ability to estimate accurate anomaly returns. The anomaly is robust to the type of low-risk metric used and over time. Like other factor literature, the author suggests that a combination of measures might be preferable to using single metrics for low-risk. Although the literature about Indian markets has not conclusively shown the “lottery-seeking” behavior in Indian equities, findings from this study suggest that searching for other explanations for the low-risk anomaly is a fruitful avenue for future research. Long-short beta-neutral factors are not investable portfolios; instead, they add to the list of formal academic factors available monthly.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of firms that are listed on the NSE or BSE (Indian equities markets).
(The data used to construct low-risk portfolios are sourced from Refinitiv and Datastream [using the Worldscope India database]. The factor data and risk-free rates used in our analysis are sourced from Invespa.)

The general idea of low-risk strategies is to buy (overweight) low-risk assets and to short (underweight) high-risk assets.
Spread in the D_1 less D_10 portfolio is creating a statistically significant average alpha we are catching.

We use two factors following the Fama and French (2015) methodology of double-sorted portfolios:
1. The first factor is the classic size from FF. (Big stocks are those in the top 90% of the market cap for the month, and Small stocks are those in the bottom 10%.)
2. We construct a beta-neutral long-short Low-Risk Factor 3-year realized volatility (VOL) VOL_36M (replicated by the formula in column Factor Return of Table 1).

3. Portfolio Schema is [2×3] double Sorted (first) on Size and (then, secondly) VOL:
3. 1. Completely disregard less liquid Small stocks (from first Size sorting).
3. 2. From three portfolios (Low-Risk, Neutral, and High-Risk) created using the 30th and 70th percentiles of respective metrics for the Big stocks; go long (buy) low-risk, and sell (short) high-risk.

(The market factor represents the market value-weighted returns of all relevant stocks during the period.)

Weight Scheme is Market Weight: For MW portfolios, the average universe is scaled by the market factor (basically value-weighted). As mentioned previously, this strategy requires monthly rebalancing

 

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The author does not implicitly suggest any hedges against bear markets.
