The financial theory often assumes that the markets are efficient and investors are rational. However, there are also contradicting theories that state that markets are not always as efficient as the theory predicts, and there are several anomalies. Moreover, the anomalies are more frequent in periods/markets where investors are somewhat less rational or more prone to behavioral biases. The aforementioned is a reason why there are several behavioral biases and anomalies in China. Although it is a major economy, its market is dominated by retail investors. The research of Liu (2022) examines several behavioral biases such as overconfidence, herding, and disposition effect and studies whether these effects could be a base of asset pricing factors. Albeit the author shows the potential pricing power of the factors and their possible enhancement of the more classical factor models, the critical finding is that the factors could be understood as investable strategies.
This screener’s addition is related to the disposition effect, which is related to the behavioral bias where investors realize profits in stocks with accrued gains but hold stocks with accrued losses. Therefore, one could estimate the effect based on the abnormal trading volume and its interaction with past prices (gains or losses). The abnormal trading volume could be estimated using a time-series regression where the stock volume is explained by the total market trading volume in the market, and the residual forms the abnormal volume. Another regression is utilized to find the interaction between the abnormal volume and cumulative volume conditioned by the stock’s performance. The research shows that the most “disposition” stocks underperform those that are least affected by the disposition effect, which indicates that stocks that are the most deflected from their fundamental value underperform over the following year.

Fundamental reason
The rationality of the disposition effect is easily understandable. It is clear that the investors are keen to realize their gains and, on the other hand, are unwilling to realize the losses. While the profit-taking might bring joy, investors are reluctant to accept the loss since they believe it would turn around. However, the profit-taking in stocks with a past positive performance and perhaps positive fundamental news slows the upward momentum, and the unwillingness to realize losses slows the decrease of price in losers (from the momentum`s point of view) with potentially negative news that have started the decrease. As a result, the stocks which are most affected by the disposition effect are prone to mispricing since these stocks are deflected from their fundamental value. According to the strategy, this deflection is corrected in the long run, and therefore it seems to be reasonable to bet on the correction: short the most disposition effect affected stocks and long the least affected stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of A-share stocks listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets. The data is sourced from the China Stock Market & Accounting Research (CSMAR) database. The disposition effect is estimated based on two regressions. Firstly, for each stock and each day, the trading volume of the stock is explained by a constant and the total trading volume for all stocks in the market. Estimate the regressions and compute the residuals, which are the proxy for the abnormal trading volume using the past year’s observations. Secondly, the abnormal trading volume is explained by a constant and two cumulative raw volume measures conditioned on the price. The first cumulative raw volume at day t is computed as the sum of daily volumes over the previous 365 days when the price was higher than the actual price at day t. The second cumulative raw volume at day t is computed as the sum of daily volumes over the previous 365 days when the price was lower than the actual price at day t. In the regression, we can associate the first sum with the beta_1 coefficient and the second one with the beta_2 coefficient. As a result, the negative beta_1 or positive beta_2 indicates a disposition effect. Each year on the first of May, the regressions are estimated, and stocks are firstly sorted into two size groups – small and big based on the median market cap over the previous year. Secondly, stocks are sorted into disposition effect group and no disposition group. According to the author, the sorting is made by “checking the signs of the regression coefficients,” which is a vague and unclear definition. In our opinion, a reasonable sorting (and identification) could be made by identifying the stocks with negative beta_1 and computing the absolute values. Subsequently, we would find the stocks with positive beta_2, and we would group the stocks together. Then it is possible to compare the “severity” of the disposition effect by identifying the highest values of the combined group with absolute beta_1 and beta_2 coefficients (in cases when both absolute values of beta_1 and beta_2 are positive, it would be reasonable to take the max value of these two measures). As a factor portfolio, divide stocks based on the median of the combined beta. According to the paper, long the no disposition small and big size portfolios and short the disposition small and big size portfolios. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced yearly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide any information regarding this topic.