A different market sentiment accompanying different U.S presidencies has been the foundation of many trading strategies. One of the widely known and documented market anomalies is that the stock market returns are higher during the Democratic presidency. Regarding this anomaly, the model of political cycles from Pastor and Veronesi (2020) explains that during times with high risk aversion (and high risk premium), the agents tend to vote democrats, which subsequently leads to higher equity returns during the Democratic presidency.
Now, a novel paper from Zilin Chen et al. (2021) extends the research on this topic and brings evidence of yet undocumented anomaly. Starting off by constructing a new Presidential Economic Approval Rating (PEAR) index, which measures the public opinion on how good the president handles the economy, the authors provide evidence that times with low public confidence in the current president’s handling of the economy predicts Democratic presidency. Therefore, in alignment with Pastor and Veronesi (2020) model, the PEAR index is inversely related to aggregate risk aversion, so the times with low values of the PEAR index are accompanied by investors high risk aversion. An extension to this model would expect that stocks with high beta to PEAR index should earn substantially higher returns, as they are riskier. However, the authors document the exact opposite and discover an anomaly in the financial markets. A decile portfolio of stocks with the lowest beta to PEAR index has over-performed the decile portfolio of stocks with the highest beta by 1.11% per month from 1983 to 2019.

Fundamental reason
The researchers address this anomaly to the possible mispricing caused by the sentiment regarding the current presidential alignment. For example, a stock of an oil company can be significantly underpriced and have a low PEAR beta during the reign of the president, who is more oriented towards clean energy. Once there is a new president with different preferences, the correction of this mispricing is the source of low PEAR beta premium. As the researchers further state, the abnormal returns of low-high PEAR beta spread portfolios are earned mainly thanks to the portfolios’ long-leg. This suggests that while the low PEAR beta stocks are underpriced, the high PEAR beta stocks are priced fairly.
The abnormal returns remain significant after controlling for various combinations of other risk factors. Also, the premium is not driven by any sub-sample periods, is larger among large and liquid stocks and is robust to different periods for regression estimation.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks listed on NASDAQ, NYSE and AMEX. Exclude stocks from Financial and Utility sectors and stocks with a price lower than $1. First of all, it is necessary to define the Presidential Economic Approval Rating (PEAR) index by using various national polls. Consider polls included in the Roper iPoll database and focus on the responses regarding the economy-specific question: “Do you approve or disapprove of the way (name of a president) is handling the economy?”. From each poll in the respective month, obtain the percentage number representing the proportion of respondents who approve the president’s handling of the economy. Then, calculate the monthly value of the PEAR index as a simple average of these proportions from each available poll from the respective month. Exclude polls conducted in one month but published in the next month.
Then, for each stock in the investment universe estimate the stocks beta to the PEAR index. To determine this beta, run a rolling 60-month regression of stock’s monthly return on two variables: the difference in PEAR index in month t plus the difference in PEAR index in month t-1. The stock’s beta is defined as the sum of the two beta coefficients from this regression.
At the end of each month, sort stocks into deciles and go long (short) on the low (high) decile stocks with the lowest (highest) beta to PEAR index. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - According to Table 4 – Panel C, the strategy should be profitable during both recessions and expansions. However, based on figure 2, the strategy still seems to fall at the start of the crisis. On the other hand, it seems to recover fairly quickly.