Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) risk rating measures to what extent is a firm exposed to industry-specific material ESG risks and how well it manages those risks. More specifically, firms that perform poorly in terms of ESG suffer greater uncertainty from a variety of aspects, including when and how ESG-related governmental regulations will be approved, investor divestment policies, and revenue volatility. With the increasing awareness of ESG components, individual investors and fund managers are increasingly interested in assets that fulfill ESG requirements.
The novel research shows that ESG uncertainty is priced in the options market, and option prices reflect market consensus on ESG uncertainty. For firms with low ESG scores, implied volatility is greater, and delta-hedged option gain is more negative, both suggesting that option prices are more expensive. Furthermore, the cost of options is affected by all aspects of ESG. However, the environmental and social components have a significantly larger influence than governance. Lastly, increases in ESG risks at the company level result in more expensive options. This premium is derived from volatility and jump risks, as well as higher-moment risks. However, there is significant variation across firms in several areas, such as customer proximity, investing strategies, or hedging activities.
The findings that low ESG options are “expensive” and high ESG options are “cheap” could be utilized in a simple trading strategy that sort stocks based on their ESG score and trades the underyling delta-hedged options.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the logic behind investors’ behavioral bias. In three real-life studies, the authors investigate whether the influence of the ESG score is magnified to demonstrate causation. Firstly, the impact of the Paris Agreement (PA) is investigated. The PA is considered a historic moment in global climate change mitigation. The results suggest that the implied volatility between firms with low and high ESG scores moved up by more than 6% after the public announcement of the PA. Secondly, when analyzing the most famous speeches of Greta Thunberg, a Swedish environmental activist, we can again see that difference in implied volatility between firms with low and high ESG scores is widening around times when Greta’s speeches took place. Lastly, when looking at social and moral issues, the authors investigate the influence of the Me-too movement, anti-sexual abuse, and anti-sexual harassment social movement. Again, the results show that after actress Alyssa Milano tweeted and supported this movement (it was the first time that it received worldwide attention) difference in implied volatility between firms with low and high ESG scores moved up by approximately 4% during 20 days after the tweet was posted. Therefore, we can observe that after every major social or environmental movement the difference in implied volatility moves up by a significant number.
Overall, it is costly to hedge ESG related risks for the lowest rated firms and options of such firms are expensive. Investors have to pay a premium to hedge uncertainty related to the ESG risks, and this finding could be utilized in a trading strategy.
Additionally, the research uses a delta-hedged option and straddle returns to explicitly quantify the option pricing impacts of the ESG score.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). The primary variable of interest is the ESG performance obtained from Asset4 (includes firms in the S&P 500 index and the Russell 1000 index). Firstly, sort all the stocks into quintiles based on ESG score at the end of each month. The trading strategy goes short delta-neutral call option position for the lowest quantile (firms with the lowest ESG scores) and long delta-neutral call option position for the highest quantile (firms with the highest ESG scores). The strategy is equally weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide any information in regard to this topic (the delta-hedged positions are not rebalanced each day).