What is the easiest way to earn money in markets? Find a super-manager and invest money into his fund. But is there a way to distinguish real alpha-deliverers from simple luck? Research suggests there is one way how to do it (at least in equity mutual funds). When a mutual fund contains mostly mediocre-performing stocks and only one or a few super-performers, then it is likely that the overall fund performance would be due to luck. However, a fund that has a larger number of above-average performing stocks may have a good fund performance due to its manager’s true stock picking-ability. A fund manager‘s stock-picking skill could, therefore, be observed from the distribution of the individual stock performances inside the fund. Consistency can be measured by analyzing the skewness of the distribution; if a manager consistently picked above-average performing stocks, the individual stock performance distribution inside the fund would be left-skewed. Research also shows that this measure works best for the funds with the best past performance.

Fundamental reason
How can we be sure that a manager is skilled in his job? It makes sense that the more good stocks he picked in the past, the more skilled he is (or there is a higher probability) than somebody who has picked only a few top-performing stocks (and most of the stocks were only average).

Simple trading strategy
The alpha measure is calculated for all stocks on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ – the Carhart 4-factor model and past 125-day performance are used as inputs in the regression equation. Stocks are then divided into percentiles based on their alpha measure.

Growth equity funds are used as the investment universe. Periodical quarterly (or 6-month) holding statements are used as inputs to calculate the skewness measure. The skewness measure is calculated for each fund as:
S = n/((n-1)*(n-2))*SUM(Wi^1,5*(Xi-(Average(X)/sigma)^3))
where n is the number of stocks in the fund, Wi is the weight of stock i, Xi is the alpha ranking of stock i (percentile), and sigma is the standard deviation of the alpha rankings in the fund.

The investor then chooses the top quintile of the funds with the best past performance (the paper doesn’t state the measuring interval, but a 12-month interval would probably be adequate) and selects the top quintile of funds with the most negative skewness for his/her investments.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Fund picking strategy is implemented in a long-only variant, which means that it is not suitable to hedge equity market risk.