Studies involving market microstructure and asset pricing within the context of high-frequency returns provide a potentially interesting source of alpha, albeit sometimes at the cost of increased levels of trading activity. There are many strategies that can be deployed with varying levels of success, such as high-frequency reversals, event-driven strategies etc. The authors recognize this, proposing an analysis on the industry level, predicting the return on the respective most liquid ETF products as proxies for the industry returns. This is an interesting approach as the ETF’s arguably constitute a complex bundle of risk exposures, and modeling such a process through an asset pricing framework can pose quite a big challenge. Nevertheless, a relatively novel dataset using news and the associated aggregated measures of news reactions based on overnight news events yields statistically significant portfolios that potentially justify the higher turnovers. The orthogonality of such signal is explored using the standard Fama-Macbeth approach, and there are potential arbitrage opportunities to be exploited from this simple yet very data-driven approach.

Fundamental reason
Previous research has suggested that the market often underreacts to corporate news announcements because of overly optimistic expectations on the excess returns of an asset. This behavioral explanation is also present in high-frequency settings where it potentially creates a short-term momentum effect for those stocks that are potentially driven by these news events. On the contrary, we could hypothesize that securities not affected by a news event would converge back to their mean. By aggregating the value-weighted news-driven returns on the ETF in question, a statistic can be constructed to determine the relative predictive power of such momentum or reversal in an ETF based on the activity of the individual stocks that form the tracking fund. This approach is quite novel, but it has to be said that a number of concerns arise while considering such a strategy. First of all, there is no trading delay incorporated, assuming that the analysis and portfolio sorting happen at 10 am and consequently holding the sorted portfolios from 10 am until the market close. It is important to consider this deficiency in a high-frequency setting due to the rapid changes in the order book and high signal dissipation levels. Further, a transaction cost analysis needs to be conducted as the variability of the value-weighted indices on the news could introduce a lot of trading into the system, which could deteriorate the alpha.

Simple trading strategy
The ETF dataset consists of 226 sector-specific ETF’s from the ETFGlobal database, with a sample running from January 2000 until July 2020. In addition, the stocks from NYSE, NASDAQ and AMEX with share codes 10 or 11 are used with 4300 unique stocks per day to link to the specific news data. The data is transformed into 30-minute returns plus the overnight return with further transformations that can be found in the appendix. For the news data, the RavenPack new database is used, which provides an NLP engine for sampling firm-specific news from the Dow Jones News Wire. Only news with a relevance score of a 100 are included in the sample, and 12 news groups are selected that can be found in the section 2.1.2 of the paper. Repeated news stories are excluded by only including news with a novelty score of 100. A stock-level news-driven return is constructed using the news information defined as the indicator function of a news event being released during the return measurement period (equation 4 in the paper). Further, an ETF-level news return is constructed using a value-weighted average of news returns belonging to the sector represented by the ETF. Next, the portfolios are formed at 10 am on each trading day by sorting the ETF’s into quantiles based on the news return index. The strategy then goes long on the top quintile and short on the bottom one. The holding period is until the close of the same trading day, after which the positions are closed and strategy is equally-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Based on Figure 4 – the performance suggests that the strategy is immune to market crashes. However, inspecting the portfolio growth, there might be overfitting.