China has the second largest stock market in the world, and unlike in the U.S., it is dominated mainly by retail investors. Since retail investors generally make suboptimal investment decisions, the Chinese stock market offers great arbitraging opportunities to sophisticated investors. Among the documented market anomalies, the stock price reversal, in particular, appears to be strong in China and cannot be explained by the Chinese three-factor model of Liu, Stambaugh, and Yuan (2019). Given the robust profitability of the reversal strategy and its vast popularity among quantitative investors in China, a novel paper by Liu, Qiu, Shen, and Zheng (2022) examine the returns to the standard long-short reversal portfolio conditional on arbitrage intensity. To capture the arbitrage intensity, the authors construct a variable called coreversal (CoREV) that measures the degree of abnormal return correlation among stocks on which arbitrageurs speculate. Their study finds that for the 20% of the sample period with high CoREV, a standard reversal strategy produces 13.6% higher abnormal returns over the first year and a further 3.8% higher abnormal returns over the second year relative to its performance during the 20% of the sample period with low CoREV. However, this pattern is completely reversed in the third year. Specifically, in the 20% of the sample period with high CoREV, the strategy produces 16% lower abnormal returns over the third year relative to its performance during the 20% of the sample period with low CoREV. In other words, excessive price overshoots generated by crowded arbitrage activities during the first two years get almost completely wiped out in the third year. Naturally, one can utilize these return patterns to boost performance for the standard reversal strategy by timing the market conditional on the arbitrage intensity.

Fundamental reason
Recent empirical evidence suggests that arbitrageurs can destabilize asset prices, generating short-term price overshoots and long-term reversals. For example, Hong, Kubik, and Fishman (2012) demonstrate that short sellers induce temporary price boosts and subsequent reversals following good unexpected earnings news, thus exacerbating economic shocks. In a similar study, Lou and Polk (2022) document that returns on momentum stocks strongly revert following periods with crowded momentum trading, consistent with the notion that intensive arbitrage activities push prices further away from fundamentals. Intuitively, when reversal trading intensity is high (high CoREV), arbitrageurs overbuy loser stocks and oversell winner stocks generating superior short-term profits for the reversal strategy that are subsequently corrected in the long-term. The proposed enhanced version of reversal strategy attempts to time the market and capture the abnormal short-term profits in an environment with high arbitrage intensity.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all Chinese A-share stocks from the Wind Economic Database. First, exclude 30% smallest stocks based on their firm size and stocks that are listed for less than seven months. Second, construct the reversal strategy as follows. At the end of each month t, sort the available stocks into decile portfolios based on their past twelve months’ cumulative returns and form a value-weighted reversal strategy that buys stocks in the bottom decile (past losers) and sells stocks in the top decile (past winners). Rebalance the strategy at a monthly frequency. Third, compute the average pairwise abnormal correlations in the loser (winner) decile using the latest 52 weekly returns as indicated in Eq. 1 (Eq. 2). In particular, sum the correlations between the excess return of each stock i in the bottom (top) decile and the equal-weighted average excess return of the bottom (top) decile excluding stock i and take the average of this sum. Finally, compute the coreversal measure (CoREV) as the simple average of the average pairwise abnormal correlations in the loser decile and winner decile. The trading rule for reversal strategy is as follows: if CoREV is at the month-end within its top quintile, buy the standard long-short reversal portfolio over the next year, otherwise, hold cash.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -