The vast literature about implications of the earnings growth, earnings acceleration or the change in earnings growth has received just limited research attention. However, earnings acceleration is a significant predictor of future stock returns. This acceleration is calculated as the change in earnings growth from one quarter to the next quarter, while earnings growth is a scaled change in earnings over the corresponding quarter a year ago. The novel approach of this paper in contrast to the other literature is the focus on quarterly earnings growth rather than annual earnings growth. The reason is simple: much of the information about the market in annual earnings is assimilated in the stock price well before the annual earnings information is released. A simple but robust trading strategy based on this anomaly can be employed. This strategy goes long the top decile of quarterly earnings acceleration and goes short the bottom decile of the earnings acceleration. Strategy, as mentioned above, produces large market-adjusted returns both in one-month and quarter-long trading windows. Still, our interest would be centred around the monthly strategy (quarter-long trading strategy can be found in the paper).

Fundamental reason
Firstly, results indicate that the abnormal returns are consistent with the theory that investors do not fully incorporate the implications of the current earnings acceleration for future earnings growth. Direct tests of the market efficiency confirm that the positive returns from the earnings acceleration strategy and the positive implications of earnings acceleration for future earnings growth are strongly associated. Secondly, research has documented that the post-2003 returns from several well-documented anomalies are insignificantly different from zero. However, this is not a problem of the earnings acceleration anomaly, which continues to perform well even in the period starting from the year 2003. Moreover, past research recommends a t-statistic higher than 3,0 for any new variable which would explain the cross-section of returns; the aforementioned strategy comfortably fulfils this condition. From the practical point of view, the results of this strategy remain significant even with the usage of value-weighted portfolios. Lastly, economically significant excess returns of this strategy are remarkably stable over a period of 176 quarters.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ firms that have stock returns data in CRSP. Financial and utility firms with SIC codes from 6000 to 6999 and from 4900 to 4949 are excluded.

Firstly, the earnings acceleration is calculated as a difference of two fractions, where the first fraction is Earnings per share (EPS) of stock i at quarter t minus the EPS of stock i at quarter t-4 divided by the stock price at the end of quarter t-1. The second fraction is a difference of EPS of stock i at quarter t-1 and EPS of stock i at quarter t-5 divided by the stock price at the end of quarter t-2.

Long the highest earnings acceleration decile and short the lowest earnings acceleration decile. Holding period is one month – two days after quarter t’s earnings announcement date and ending on day 30 of the month. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced daily because of the announcement dates.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.