The low-risk effect has become a widespread debate amongst researchers and partitioners. For example, Asness, Frazzini, and Pedersen (2017) identified the Betting-against-beta factor (BAB) that goes long (short) low (high) beta stocks, resulting in positive abnormal returns. They seek to explain the low-risk effect by leverage constraints or behavioral effects. The BAB factor could be decomposed into two specific factors: betting against correlation (BAC) and betting against volatility (BAV).
The novel research by Pasetti and Montagna (2021) builds on the previous studies and investigates the modified BAC factor to maximize performance. Asness, Frazzini, and Pedersen (2017) construct the BAC factor based on quintiles, whereas the paper follows the original framework but with two different strategies: qBAC and dBAC based on quartiles and deciles construction, respectively. The stocks are sorted into portfolios based on their correlation against S&P500. In addition, the authors seek to attribute premium to stocks with low-correlation values and present three different kinds of strategy returns. In comparison to Asness, Frazzini, and Pedersen’s (2017) study, where the best performances are driven by rank-basis weights, the novel research shows that correlation weights drive the best performances. The simple trading strategy is proposed by going long low-correlation stocks and short high correlation stocks.

Fundamental reason
According to the CAPM model, there is a positive risk-reward relationship in capital assets. It also says that economic agents would prefer portfolios with the highest expected returns per unit of risk. However, many investors are not able to do so because of the leverage constraints, leading to an overweight for risky assets and their overpricing. Another explanation for the BAB factor is the behavioral effect. Investors are seeking for high-beta stocks because of their extra premium. However, Bob Haugen (1962) presents a negative relationship between risk-reward relationship, making low beta stocks more attractive to investors than high beta stocks. The BAB factor cannot be explained by any Fama-French model. Amongst the two components of the BAB factor, BAC and BAV, the BAC factor is more interesting from the perspective of historical performance. Investing in low-correlated stocks generates premium. The strategy outperformed S&P 500 benchmark until the end of 2016 due its long position of defensive sectors (Utilities, Healthcare and Consumer Staples) and short position of cyclical sectors (Industrials, Techs and Financials). During the pandemic years, the intervention of central banks and the consequent significant rally in tech stock prices leads to underperformance of the strategy against the benchmark.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of AMEX, NYSE, NASDAQ stocks with share codes 10 and 11 extracted from CRSP. The sample period covers from 2003 to 2021. The primary variable of the interest is the quartile Betting Against Correlation (qBAC) factor. We firstly sort stocks in an ascending way based on their standard deviation and then they are assigned to one of the four quartiles. Within each quartile stocks are sorted again in an ascending way, but this time based on their correlation to the S&P500 and then assigned to one of the two portfolios: low and high correlation portfolios. Within each quartile we go long (short) low (high) correlation stocks using the median as a threshold. Stocks are correlation weighted and monthly rebalanced. The correlation weight for each individual stock (i) of the short leg is defined as correlation for individual stock (i) normalized by sum of correlations of all other stocks. The correlation weight for each individual stock (i) of the long leg is similar to the short leg but with the inverse correlations, defined as an inverse correlation for each individual stock (i) normalized by sum of inverse correlations of all other stocks. The risk-adjusted returns for each quartile are then obtained by taking the difference between long/short portfolio, defined as the inverse correlation weights/correlation weights multiplied by the inverse of beta factor. Finally, the qBAC factor is defined by taking a simple arithmetic average of risk-adjusted returns of each quartile.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - both the methodologies show a positive performance during the time interval with limited drawdown (well below – 10%) even during the Great Financial Crisis in mid-2000s.