Academic research has already proved that on average, stocks that have prices near their 52-week highs in the subsequent months signiﬁcantly outperform stocks whose prices are far away from this “anchor”. According to the literature, 52-week high is a psychological anchor for investors that triggers an initial underreaction to the news. However, as probably every anomaly, the performance of the original simple idea could be enhanced with an addition of different idea or factor. This novel research studies the 52-week high anomaly in the context of investor underreaction to fundamental news. The study states that considering the anchoring hypothesis, stock price’s nearness to the 52-week high alone is simply not adequate for the measurement of the severity of investor’s underreaction to fundamental news. Since many stocks could trade near their 52-week high for reasons that are unrelated to their fundamentals, it could be worth to take into account both the nearness to the 52 weeks high and also a ﬁrm’s fundamental strength that is reﬂected in its recent ﬁnancial statements. Fundamental strength can be easily measured by the composite ﬁrm fundamental index or the FSCORE from Piotroski. The FSCORE is a measure that includes three dimensions: proﬁtability, operating eﬃciency and leverage, and could be easily used as a proxy for the fundamental strength. Research shows that accurate way how to measure the degree of investor’s underreaction to fundamental news is by taking into account both the 52-week high nearness and a ﬁrm’s fundamental strength. Naturally, such underreaction could be utilized into a profit and the portfolio that takes a long position in stocks with both high nearness, and high FSCORE, and short position in stocks with both low nearness, and low FSCORE, earns a highly signiﬁcant monthly mean return that nearly doubles the average returns of portfolios sorted on the 52-week nearness variable alone. On the other hand, the spread portfolio where nearness variable and FSCORE are inconsistent has an average return that is almost zero.

Fundamental reason
Academic literature agrees on the theory that 52-week high anomaly is likely driven by the actions of less sophisticated sentiment investors who suﬀer from the anchoring bias. Moreover, by considering the joint eﬀect from both the 52-week nearness and FSCORE, practitioners are able to better identify ﬁrms where underreaction to fundamental news is prevalent and use this information for their benefit. Although the research has found out that the q-factor model oﬀers the most promising risk-based alternative explanation, it was found that the explanatory power from the q-factor model seems to be sensitive to several outliers during the momentum crash months. Since many stocks could trade near their 52-week high for reasons that are unrelated to their fundamentals, it could be worth to take into account both the nearness to the 52 weeks high and also a ﬁrm’s fundamental strength (that could be measured by the FSCORE), which is reﬂected in its recent ﬁnancial statements. Additionally, sophisticated institutional investors respond to ﬁnancial strength (FSCORE) signals in a more timely manner than less sophisticated investors. As the research proves, sophisticated investors (institutional investors and short-sellers) do not underreact to news when stock prices are near the 52-week highs. Therefore the ﬁndings are consistent with previous literature that states that the underreaction appears to be concentrated among less sophisticated investors.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks listed on the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. Financial ﬁrms are excluded as well as ﬁrms with prices less than $5 at the end of the portfolio formation period.

Firstly, divide stocks by the size of firms into three categories and from now on, only largest firms are considered.

Secondly, compute the measure of the nearness to a 52-week high as the ratio of the closing price at the end of a month to the highest daily closing price during the past 12 months.

As a next step, compute the Piotroski’s FSCORE in quarterly frequency as a measure of the comprehensive fundamental strength of the firm. At the end of each month assign stocks into 15 (5 by 3) portfolios based on two-way independent sorts on a stock’s nearness to its 52-week high and its fundamental strength as measured by its FSCORE. Quintile sort is used for the 52-week nearness, and FSCORE is categorized into three groups: 0 to 3 (low FSCORE), 4 to 6 (mid FSCORE) and 7 to 9 (high FSCORE).

Take a long position in stocks where both the nearness and FSCORE rankings are high and short position in stocks where both measures are low. Positions are held for six months, but stocks are sorted each month, which creates overlapping portfolios. Portfolios are equally-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.