Institutional trading has a high impact on stock prices as institutions, such as mutual funds and hedge funds, are active investors who spend billions of dollars each year on trading equities. To justify these expenditures, institutional investors must believe that active trading is profitable, and exploiting profitable trading opportunities requires trading, leading to a high turnover of ownership. Academic research shows that a high turnover of ownership by institutions in a given stock indicates that institutions are finding more trading opportunities in that stock, so a premium in stock prices and low subsequent stock returns can be expected. The effect could be enhanced by screening for stocks where institutions trade mainly with individual traders. Individuals are expected to be less sophisticated investors, so institutions selling stocks to individual traders could be seen as an additional negative sign for future returns.

Fundamental reason
Academic research shows that institutions exploit their information superiority, so stocks with a high flow from institutions to retail trader/investors are expected to deliver lower returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks with a price higher than $1. Each quarter, stocks are divided into quintiles, and only the highest turnover quintile is used in the next calculation.

Data from 13f filings for all stocks are used. Institutional investors are identified in these reports, and it is assumed that the part of the company which is not held by institutions is held by individuals. The investor then calculates the turnover of ownership between institutions and individuals (InstTurnIndiv). He/she treats all institutions as one investor and calculates the aggregate shares owned by the institution in each quarter. The number of shares traded between institutions and individuals in a quarter is the absolute value of the change in the aggregate number of shares held by institutions from the beginning until the end of that quarter. He/she then averages the number of shares traded over the most recent eight quarters and divides that by the total number of shares held by all institutions averaged over that period. Stocks are sorted into deciles based on the ‘InstTurnIndiv’ measure.

The investor goes long on the lowest ‘InstTurnIndiv’ decile and goes short on the highest ‘InstTurnIndiv’ decile. The portfolio is rebalanced quarterly, and stocks are weighted equally.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.