Historically, buyers in the equity market have always viewed announcements from firms seeking Strategic Alternatives (SA), in other words opening themselves up to a merger or takeover, as a signal to buy and expect positive returns. However, through sampling and tracking over 1000 SA announcements, the authors of this paper look to challenge this notion and in fact conclude that beyond the short term, such an announcement should be a sell signal. Moreover, they incorporate the overweighted beliefs traders currently hold in the market within their tests and find that they further compound the downside effects.

Therefore, making use of notions introduced in this paper, we formulate a trading strategy surrounding the shorting of listed stocks following an SA announcement and take advantage of the reversal that follows false confidence from buyers.

Fundamental reason
The authors of this paper introduce the term ‘availability heuristics’ which pulls together the reasons behind the reversal that follows an SA announcement. This term can be broken down into 4, as similarly done in the paper. 1) Investors base their research on prior available M&A transactions and the immediate market reaction to them, usually positive, and hence decide to buy. However, their research ignores the long-term reversal that almost always follows. 2) SA announcements usually predict/indicate future M&A transactions, so investors think buying at the point of an SA investment is buying early to increase profits However, investors forget to account for the fact that the firm may not actually receive M&A bids/offers but poor fundamentals will still remain; hence, the price will reflect this negatively. 4) Future earnings reports will highlight poor fundamentals; hence, the market will quickly react to this and this leads to a reversal. 5) Analysts make misinformed overpriced estimates on the back of an announcement and are quick to revise their price targets following earnings reports. Together, we see that a price reversal is a result of the availability heuristics present following an SA announcement; hence, also providing functionality for the trading strategy proposed.1)

Additionally, we see the 3-month holding period suggested in our trading strategy is in fact optimal. Through testing on over 1000 stocks with recent SA announcements, as done in the paper, it was found that the reversal peaks at the 3-month period. It is found that before this point the reversal has barely started as a month after the stock still experiences positive returns due to the announcement and the reversal is just about to begin. Beyond the 3 months, as we approach the 6-month point, it is found that the reversal has peaked and gotten to a point where its effect on the returns is subsiding. Further beyond that, at the 9-12 months, the reversal is barely in effect. Therefore, our trading strategy has further justification due to the time period chosen.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks listed on the NYSE. The first variable of interest is an indicator for all stocks that will return a positive signal if the underlying company has made an SA (Strategic Alternatives) announcement in the past 3 months, 0 otherwise. Secondly, for those with a positive signal, we are also interested in how many days are left till it has been 3 months since the announcement, which we store under T as the holding period. The investment universe is split into two halves, stocks returning a positive signal in one half and the rest in the other. We will go short on the stocks in the first half, at the same time go long the size and book-to-market adjusted peers and hold this position for the time suggested by the holding period T. Stocks are weighted equally and the portfolio is rebalanced quarterly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide any information about such strategies feasibility in bear markets.