Generally, option strategies focus mostly on S&P 500 index options. In comparison, a very interesting academic research paper by Campassano and Linn focuses on the relationship between maturity, volatility term structure and volatility risk premia in individual equity options. The research paper has a lot of interesting findings which can be used to build multiple cross-sectional option trading strategies. Specifically, the research studied the dependency between option (6-month ATM straddles) returns and volatility term structure in the cross-section. The six-month options with the most inverted term structure have a negative volatility risk premium on average. The returns on six month ATM straddles are increasing from decile 1 to decile 10. The combination of long decile ten and short decile 1 makes strategy interesting due to high Sharpe Ratio and favourable correlation structure to other options strategies.

Fundamental reason
The reason for functionality is based on a rule that for unconditional prices of risk associated with the market expected returns and volatility, the longer the horizon over which the risk is measured, the smaller the magnitude of that risk’s price. The consistency of these findings across asset classes and types of risk suggests something fundamental about investor’s risk preferences over varying time horizons. The term structure of implied volatility is strongly correlated with existent measures of overreaction in the prices of short-maturity options. The realized volatility measured at different horizons does exhibit explanatory power for both short and long maturity implied volatility. There is a strong relationship between the slope of volatility term structure and volatility risk premia in short maturity options. As the term structure inverts, the impact of realized volatility on the slope diminishes. Whereas the risk premia in one-month options increase as term structure becomes inverted, the volatility risk premium for longer maturity options reverses as the curve steepens. It is a decrease in the risk premium for six-months volatility as the term structure slope decrease. So the returns of one month straddle monotonically increase as the slope also increases. In compare, the longer maturity options have a monotonic relation between returns and slope too, but it is a case of negative correlation.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all U.S. equity options. The options straddles are formed on the day following the standard monthly options expiration on the third Friday of each month. On this day, all options that violate arbitrage conditions or their underlying equity price is less than 10 USD are excluded ( the straddle is included in portfolio when both a put and call ATM option exists and meet these conditions). Only ATM options are included (the delta is between 0,35 (-0,35) and 0,65 (-0,65) for the call (put)). Investor identifies the put and call option for each equity, for each expiration from one to six months.

The portfolio is formed based on the slope of the implied volatility term structure. All straddles are placed into deciles and maturity buckets. Decile one holds straddles with the most upward-sloping term structure (positive slope), and decile 10 includes those with the most inverted downward sloping (negative) slope. The strategy buys decile ten and sells decile 1 of six month ATM straddles. The holding period is one month, and the portfolio is equally weighted. Only 20% of the total portfolio value is invested in this strategy because of its leptokurtic skewness.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.