It is well known that markets are not always rational. In fact, many anomalies and quantitative strategies are based on behavioural biases and irrationality. Yet, asset pricing models and their factors rely on fundamentals. The problem is that prices tend to deviate from their fundamental values significantly.
The novel research examines the possibility of augmenting the  Fama French five-factor model with a factor related to the sentiment. The reason is that past research has concluded that both fundamentals and sentiment drive asset prices. In the recent period, the usage of sentiment extracted from the news or social media is an emerging topic, but the research suggests that the sentiment extracted from social media is more valuable and informative.
The paper examines the construction of the sentiment factor that compares the actual sentiment value to the rolling mean sentiment value. Therefore, the factor tracks the changes in sentiment, which according to the theory, should be priced in stocks. Additionally, apart from the possible usage as an asset pricing factor, the sentiment factor that goes long positive sentiment stocks and shorts negative sentiment stocks forms a profitable strategy.

Fundamental reason
The asset pricing models and the well-known factors such as size, value, profitability or investment rely on fundamentals. As we see in the practice every day, the financial markets or investors are not always rational, and prices tend to deviate from their fundamental values. Past research has already suggested that the assets are driven by both the fundamentals and sentiment.
The sentiment factor extracted from social media is related to the mood of investors, which has been repeatedly proved to influence decision making and thus asset prices. From another point of view, the sentiment factor could be viewed as the wisdom of the crowd. The functionality is also proved by improving the Fama French five-factor model once the sentiment factor is included. Adding the sentiment to the pure fundamental model explains more variation and reduce the alphas (intercepts). Moreover, the factor is unrelated to the well-known and established risk factors utilized in the previous asset pricing models, including the momentum

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks with share codes 10 and 11 listed on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. The social media-based sentiment index is obtained from Refinitiv-MarketPsych. For each stock, the paper utilizes the aggregated sentiment indicator (Snt) that captures the net positive versus negative references in social media. Firstly each month, calculate the difference between sentiment and its own rolling mean sentiment since inception for each stock in the sample. The difference is utilized in the construction of the sentiment factor. Sentiment factor is constructed by 2x2x2x2x2 sorts based on size, value, profitability, investment and sentiment. For the Fama French factors, the paper follows Fama French´s methodology. Therefore, at the end of each June, stocks are assigned to two size groups using the NYSE median market capitalization as the breakpoint and stocks are assigned independently to two book-to-market equity, operating profitability, and investment portfolios, using NYSE medians of the metrics. Finally, stocks are sorted according to their sentiment each month into two portfolios – positive and negative. The positive minus negative sentiment factor is the average of 16 positive sentiment portfolios minus the average of 16 negative sentiment portfolios. As a result, the strategy is rebalanced monthly and equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The strategy has a negative correlation (-0.13, Table 7) to the market factor.