Neo and Tee explore the possibility of economizing risk budget expenditure by selecting less conventional insurance securities to hedge tail risk and offer their solution to the problem in question. Instead of using the SPX index option or its full constituent equity options as the insurance securities, they construct an option universe comprising large- and mid-cap stocks and sort them by their dollar price. Further, their methodology imposes liquidity constraints on open interest and bid/offer spread. Finally, they show that a 2% monthly risk budget expenditure on the cheapest 20% of the options in our universe exhibits a robust tail risk hedging performance and is superior to the hedging version of the SPX index option. The hedging performance of their price-based heuristic (SPX + cheap puts) has an excellent risk-return profile when compared to the raw index (SPX) and the hedged portfolio using index options (SPX + index puts). Therefore, we found that variant to be most suitable for most investors looking at new strategies in our Screener, and therefore, we include it there.

Fundamental reason
Efficient tail risk hedging has essential implications on a portfolio’s ability to weather through extreme market conditions. Given the challenge in predicting tail risk events, it is common for portfolio managers to adjust their portfolio holding to account for this contingency. That is achieved either through a diversified allocation or the acquisition of insurance securities – the latter requires a portion of a risk budget, which is prone to exert a performance drag on the portfolio. Analyses in the paper reveal that the equity options selected by price-based heuristics from the study have diverse firm characteristics, with less than half being SPX constituent stocks. During normal market conditions, their diversified return behavior leads to almost 20% of the OTM put options moving into the money, thus compensating for the risk expenditure and mitigating portfolio drag. When the market is distressed, the heightened correlation results in more than 65% of these OTM put options moving deep into the money, thus providing the necessary tail risk hedge for the SPX holding. Therefore, this heuristic can exploit the asymmetric behavior of market-level correlation under different market conditions to provide an economical and effective tail risk hedge.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P 500 market (various ETFs [SPY for U. S., SXR8.DE for Europe, for example], or even CFDs [U. K. and Commonwealth]), and put options on U. S. stocks (equity). (The option data is obtained from the IvyDB database provided by OptionMetrics, and the stock daily return is obtained from the CRSP database.)

0. Following our price-based heuristic, we sort the OTM and put options in our universe according to their dollar price. On each month’s end, we allocate a risk budget of 2% to acquire the cheapest 20% of the put options in our universe with equal dollar-weighting – this corresponds to 90 options each period on average, of which approximately 40 options’ underlying are SPX index constituent stocks.

1. On each month’s end, we select an out-of-the-money (OTM) put option for each optionable stock. The put is chosen to have a delta closest to -10%, and an expiry between 6 months to 1 year. (The choice of delta is to maintain a balance between downside risk protection and risk budget, while the option expiry is selected to minimize the number of transactions required, subject to liquidity constraint, due to the need to roll the hedging positions as the option expires.)

2. Allocate the rest (98 %) of capital in this strategy to SPX index (broad market) constituent.

The investor is required to rebalance every month. Weighting is described above (puts hedge portfolio is equally weighted).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Strategy is clearly a very nice example of a hedging strategy, that should work during crisis periods.