Selected strategy analyse one of the variations for Grossman – Stiglitz paradox, more particularly, it is focused on possibilities of “Big Data” analysis of qualitative information in disclosure papers of U.S. corporations. Authors use four methods to identify in investable universe companies which significantly change the wording of their 10K&10Q reports(Changers) and those who keep the wording unchanged (Non-changers). The strategy is based on the opening of long positions towards Non-changers and short position towards Changers. The strategy yields positive alphas already based on general comparison of 10K&10Q reports; however, it is further improved with a focus on a.) qualitative changes in reporting wording and b.) sections of reports where changes occur.

Fundamental reason
Strategy hypothesis was derived from observing particular cases in which “Efficient market strategy” does not work, and stock prices significantly lag behind publication event of financial reports. Combination of the high and increasing volume of published 10K&10Q reports and their gradual shift to nonnumerical information leads logically to premises that fundamental analysts are not able to identify crucial information in the “white noise” about the actual and future performance of the company. Authors hypothesize, that most effective metrics would be a text analysis of changes in reports between 2 reporting periods. This analysis should identify if management changes wording (negatively and/or positively) on crucial topics between reporting periods.

This metrics yield advantage due to their a.) robust numerical applicability (analyzing number of changed words instead of analyzing “sentiment ” bias of words ) and b.) fact, that most investors do to not track changes in the report but analyze only actual reports. Authors confirmed, that identification of negative sentiment changes in wording gives better predictability for the short position. Thus underlying mechanism can be simplified, that management of the company is aware of potential risks, correctly informs about these negative developments. Still, the reader of reports is not able to correctly assess this data until they are put into a broader perspective by comparing them previous years wording.

This mechanism simplification can be further supported by tests of authors, which show that changes in certain report sections yield better results, as well as test, which shows the correlation between frequent “Change/No-change” variable and actual financial performance of the company.

Results of applied strategy are mixed. In case of applying broader principle for text analyses (using text comparison metrics for whole reports), Excess return against standard L/S portfolio range from 0,34% to 0,56%. However, when authors analyzed changes in particular sections of reports, they were able to obtain better results: 188 bps against 5- Facto Alpha when using Sim_Jaccard comparison method on the Risk Factor section of 10K/10Q.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of US stocks from NYSE, AMEX and Nasdaq. Each month, the investor downloads 10K&10Q reports for 2 subsequent reporting periods for the whole underlying market. He then processes the Sim-Jaccard test to identify the extent of textual changes between 2 periods in the “Risk Factors” section of reports. Stocks are split based on the prior year’s distribution of similarity scores (“Change/NoChange” variable) into 5 quantiles. Investor goes long “NoChangers” and short “Changers” for 3 months. Stocks are weighted equally. The portfolio is rebalanced on a monthly basis, so each month, 1/3 of the portfolio is rebalanced.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.