No doubt, financial statements are a crucial part of the assessment of the company. This topic is also recognized by academic research, which states that it is able to uncover information that is not yet reﬂected in stock prices and as a result, lead to a profitable decision. Traditionally, there are several recognized components of financial statements that are able to forecast subsequent returns. This novel research explores the usage of machine learning methods for the analysis of past ﬁnancial statements capable of forecasting the sign and magnitude of stock returns around future earnings announcements. The high dimensionality of financial statements is not a problem for modern machine learning models that can learn patterns and possibly non-linear relationships based on large amounts of data.

Additionally, modern methods can avoid problems with overfitting, which can be a significant benefit compared to more traditional statistical methods. To be more precise, this paper explores the ability of various linear and non-linear methods (OLS, LASSO, Random Regression Forests, a Deep Neural Network and a Recurrent Neural Network) to predict market reaction to quarterly earnings announcements using only past quarterly statements. Among the methods above, Random Forests are the best performing models, having the highest accuracy of prediction and also being most profitable as a trading strategy. Additionally, there is a possibility to use a threshold that ensures that there will not be trades where the predicted value (Buy and Hold Abnormal Return) is around zero, because it simply can be a prediction error. The paper explores seven values, with the following conclusion: if the threshold is too big, the strategy favours nano-caps, and the strategy has a problem with liquidity.

On the other hand, if the threshold is too low, there is a large number of trades and substantial trading costs (plus there can be prediction errors). We centre our attention around Random Forests and the threshold of 0.1. The reason is that results suggest that at epsilon of 0.1, the strategy still generates large returns even when excluding micro and small-cap stocks, which can solve the problems of liquidity. To sum it up, this paper explores the novel usage of machine learning models to a large amount of raw accounting data.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the Random Forests are the best performing models, with the highest accuracy that is better than a random model. In other words, random forests can predict the magnitude of the market reaction to earnings announcements. Consistent with the highest accuracy, strategies based on Random Forests outperform other strategies. Secondly, the Random Forests are composed of individual decision trees, and the forest uses the “average” information of trees, which corrects the problems with overfitting the training set. As we have already mentioned, there also needs to be carefully selected threshold. A too low value will lead to a large amount of traded instruments, while the larger value leads to trading the small and nanocaps. Results suggest that at epsilon of 0.1, the strategy still generates large returns even when excluding micro and small-cap stocks, which can solve the problems of liquidity. Last but not least, according to the paper, the models tend to select as the most important predictors those accounting variables that are components of free cash ﬂows and well-known predictors of stock returns. Therefore, the functionality of this strategy could be, to some extent, explained by the functionality of those accounting variables.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks of firms for which are available ﬁnancial statement data in Compustat North America. There is a problem with missing values. Therefore the sample undergoes following reductions: the selection of the most populated columns, dropping rows where more than 50% of values are missing, dropping all rows where SALEQ or ATQ is missing, imputation via SoftImpute (the summary of data filtering is in Table 2). The model that is used is the Random Forest with 200 trees per forest. The training and test samples for the model are constructed using a sliding window of 5 quarters, where the four previous quarters are used as independent variables and market reaction in the actual quarter is a dependent variable. Therefore, to prevent look-ahead bias, the model uses only past data and unknown future data are used to evaluate them. Model is used for a prediction of stock returns around earnings announcements. To be more precise 30 days: the period of one day before the announcement day up until 30 days after the announcement (the immediate earnings response and the post-earnings announcement drift). The model predicts a continuous scalar that represents the abnormal returns (buy and hold abnormal return) around earnings announcements with the usage of the mean squared error as the loss function during training.

Additionally, the position (long or short) is held only if the absolute value of the predicted abnormal return is larger than epsilon that is equal to the 0,1. The trading rule is simple if the predicted return is positive and larger than epsilon, go long. If the predicted return is negative and lower than minus epsilon, go short.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.