Multiple research papers attempted to analyse post-stock-split returns, whereas most of them concluded that they are, on average, positive and significant. However, the recent study points to an aspect, which was not previously given much attention – the effect of earnings management. It is a common practice in firms to inflate their earnings through various accounting adjustments. The study finds a negative relationship between the degree of earnings management prior to the stock split and the following returns; the portfolio with the most conservative earnings management (labelled M1) earned a significantly positive one-year post-split abnormal return of 5.5%, while the portfolio with the most aggressive earnings management (M9) recorded a highly significant negative return of -16%. Based on these findings, an investor can form a zero-investment portfolio, longing stocks in M1 and shorting M9. The 4-factors model alpha for such strategy, as obtained by the authors, was 0.9% per month, which translates to 11.35% per annum.

Fundamental reason
The reason for functionality, in this case, lies in the difference between “genuine” earnings and inflated earnings in financial statements. Aggressive earnings management inflates earnings. Furthermore, a stock split, which is generally positively perceived by investors, further inflates stock price and as a result, the stock is even more “overvalued”. After some time, however, the price starts converging towards its fundamental value, causing a reversal in returns. Hence the negative relationship between the severity of earnings management prior to the stock split the and following returns described above.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stock splits realized by NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms, whose returns data are available at the CRSP database. Discretionary accruals and real activities management (RAM) variables are obtained from COMPUSTAT. An investor double-sorts stocks, first into terciles based on RAM, as proxied by abnormal cash flows (the higher the RAM, the lower the abnormal cash flows, calculated as a residual from formula (3) on page 10), and within each RAM portfolio into terciles based on discretionary accruals (calculated as a residual from formula (2) on page 9). The investor buys the portfolio with the lowest degree of discretionary accruals and the highest abnormal cash flows (M1) and shorts the portfolio at the opposite end (the highest degree of accruals and the lowest abnormal cash flows; M9). The holding period is one year. Stocks in the portfolios are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.