The authors present reversal strategies based on the overnight-intraday short-term reversal strategy (CO-OC) in futures written on four asset classes: equity indices, interest rates, commodities, and currencies. Simple overnight-intraday reversal strategy delivers an average excess return and a two to five times larger Sharpe ratio than those generated by the conventional close-to-close short-term reversal strategy in the equity index, interest rate, commodity, and currency futures. As for our database entry, we select variants performed on equity indices.

Fundamental reason
Canonical asset class-specific factors and stock return factors, including several possible economic channels, such as investor sentiment and macro-news announcements, cannot explain the CO-OC strategy return. Market liquidity conditions and asset class-specific liquidity provisions were identified as more of the cause of this anomaly. Results suggest that market structure imposes non-trivial frictions on asset prices, even in liquid markets like futures.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe contains five futures contracts traded on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange—5 equity indices (DJIA, NASDAQ, NIKKEI 225, S&P400, and S&P500). (Always select the most liquid contract; the most liquid contract is generally the nearest-to-delivery (front) contract.)
(The daily opening and closing prices of future contracts are from TickData.)

Perform a simple overnight-intraday CO-OC reversal strategy: i.e., the first two letters define the formation period return, whereas the last two letters indicate the trading period return, thus buying overnight losers and selling overnight winners.
1. Calculate overnight (that is, close-to-open) returns (eq. (4)) of chosen assets.
2. On the next day, on open, go long (buy) two worst assets based on their return from the overnight period, and simultaneously sell (short) 2 best and sell them at close.

The strategy is rebalanced daily, and assets in the final portfolio are weighted equally.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - This strategy is equity bear-market protecting: all types of reversal strategies in the equity index futures earn substantially greater returns during the crisis, while the results are weak and mixed in the other three asset classes. In short, the reversal strategies in equity index futures earn substantially greater returns during the high VIX and financial crisis periods. Still, the results are mixed and inconclusive for interest rate, commodity, and currency futures.

