The cross-sectional momentum effect is one of the most known anomalies described in financial books and papers. We have multiple database entries reviewing it from different angles (short term, long term, time-series, cross-sectional, etc.) and within different assets (currencies, commodities, stocks, etc.). However, we realized that we were missing entry about pure cross-sectional momentum strategy formed from a portfolio of futures contracts from different asset classes mixed together. This type of strategy is the most accurate benchmark for famous CTA/manage futures hedge funds. Therefore we have decided to add research paper from Ayora and Torro as a source paper for this type of multi-asset long-short cross-sectional momentum futures strategy into our database. We have added an entry about price momentum strategy, even that Ayora and Torro analyze momentum effect from various angles; however, we feel that their adjusted strategies (by volatility and open-interest) aren’t statistically significant enough for the inclusion into the database.

Fundamental reason
The momentum effect is mostly explained by behavioural biases of traders and investors like investor herding, investor over and underreaction and confirmation bias. Another line of research explains momentum profits by a macroeconomic theory as an arbitrage in-efficiencies in a price of risk in different assets during a business cycle.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 18 futures contracts (7 currency futures, six stock index futures, five fixed income futures). The list included seven currency futures (Euro/USD, Yen/USD, Canadian dollar/USD, British pound/USD, Australian dollar/USD, Swiss franc/USD, and U.S. dollar index); six stock index futures (CAC 40, FTSE 100, Nikkei 225, S&P 500, Swiss market index, Dow Jones EURO STOXX 50); and five fixed income futures (Euro bund ten-year, Canadian government bond ten-year, U.S. Treasury note two-year, U.S. Treasury note five-year, and U.S. Treasury note ten-year).

Every six months investor ranks the performance of all futures contracts based on their 6-months history. Investor goes long six top-performing futures and shorts six lowest performing futures. Portfolio equally weighted and is rebalanced every six months.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Futures trend-following/momentum strategies are a cornerstone of trend-following CTA funds and as such is an excellent candidate for an uncorrelated strategy and very often a hedge to equity market factor. The source research paper doesn’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; however, we can expect that strategy will probably retain a negative correlation to equities. Backtest would be helpful to determine correlation and hedging characteristics.