One of the most robust market anomalies is the delayed market reaction to earnings news, referred to in the literature as the post-earnings announcement drift (PEAD). It has been documented that firms reporting large positive earnings changes experience positive abnormal returns over the six months after the earnings announcement, whereas those that report large negative earnings changes experience negative abnormal returns. This PEAD effect could be enhanced by using accruals as a second factor. A long-short portfolio that combines the accruals and earnings effects (by going long on firms with the most positive earnings changes and the most negative abnormal accruals and short on firms with the most negative earnings changes and the most positive abnormal accruals) has better returns than a simple PEAD or accrual effect portfolio. The effect is much stronger if there are long positions in firms most likely to smooth earnings downward and short positions in firms that manage earnings upward.

Fundamental reason
Research suggests that PEAD is associated with investor inattention. They do not assume the quality of the earnings reports. They maintain that due to limited attention, investors’ responses to the reports are delayed, and they tend to value abnormal accruals incorrectly. If some firms manage earnings downward (upward) when they experience large positive (negative) earnings shocks, and if investors have cognitive limits or are inattentive, then future returns are likely to be positively correlated with the changes in current earnings.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks from NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ.

Abnormal accruals are calculated as residuals from the regression equation:
TA = Lambda0*Q1 + Lambda1*Q2 + Lambda2*Q3 + Lambda3*Q4 + Lambda4*ΔSALE + Lambda5*PPE + Lambda6*L1TA + Lambda7*ASSET + Lambda8*L4NI + Error
Where TA is total accruals (the difference between net income and cash flows from operations), Qx is a binary variable taking the value of one for fiscal quarter j and zero otherwise, ΔSALE is the quarterly change in sales, PPE is property, plant, and equipment at the beginning of the quarter, L1TA is the lag of total accruals, ASSET is total assets at the beginning of the quarter, L4NI is net income for the same quarter of the previous year, and ε is the regression residual. All of the variables, including the indicator variables, are scaled by the total assets at the beginning of the quarter. As firms do not announce earnings or file proxy reports at the same time, variables in the abnormal accrual model are not available at the same time for all firms. Therefore, the accrual model is estimated four quarters prior to the quarter of the portfolio formation. The estimated model’s parameters are then applied to data for the individual firms in the quarter of the portfolio formation.

Standardized earnings changes (SUE) are defined as a seasonal change in the ratio of net income to total assets.

Stocks are then sorted into quintiles based on earnings changes (SUE) and abnormal accruals. The investor goes long firms with large positive earnings changes (top quintile of SUE) and large negative abnormal accruals (bottom quintile) that are most likely to manage earnings downward. (Firms with large positive earnings changes are considered most likely to have managed earnings downward, and negative abnormal accruals are more likely related to earnings smoothing when the reported ROA is high – in the top quintile). The investor goes short firms with large negative earnings changes (bottom quintile of SUE) and large positive abnormal accruals (top quintile) that are most likely to manage earnings upward. (Firms with large negative earnings changes are deemed most likely to have managed earnings upward, and positive abnormal accruals are most likely related to earnings smoothing when the previous quarter earnings are above zero, and the firms would have missed the zero-earnings benchmark in the current quarter if they had not reported the income increase in abnormal accruals). Stocks for long (and also short) positions are held for six months from the 18th day after the earnings announcement – the strategy performance could probably be easily enhanced by going long (short) from the 1st day after the earnings announcement as the greatest moves happen mainly during the days shortly after the announcement.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of the market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.

