The financial theory often assumes that the markets are efficient and investors are rational. However, there are also contradicting theories that state that markets are not always as efficient as the theory predicts, and there are several anomalies. Moreover, the anomalies are more frequent in periods/markets where investors are somewhat less rational or more prone to behavioral biases. The aforementioned is a reason why there are several behavioral biases and anomalies in China. Although it is a major economy, its market is dominated by retail investors. The research of Liu (2022) examines several behavioral biases such as overconfidence, herding, and disposition effect and studies whether these effects could be a base of asset pricing factors. Albeit the author shows the potential pricing power of the factors and their possible enhancement of the more classical factor models, the critical finding is that the factors could be understood as investable strategies.
This screener’s addition is related to the overconfidence factor, which could be estimated using the abnormal trading volume as a proxy for overconfidence. The abnormal trading volume could be estimated using a time-series regression where the stock volume is explained by the total market trading volume in the market, and the residual forms the abnormal volume. With a monthly rebalancing, the factor results point to an observation that it is profitable to follow the behavioral bias instead of betting against it, as it is common in more developed markets. Therefore, the strategy buys the most “overconfident” stocks and shorts the least “overconfident” stocks each month.

Fundamental reason
It is not surprising that some investors tend to overestimate their capabilities, significance of their information, or ability to trade. Several pieces of research have identified that overconfidence leads investors to excessive trading, which is the reason why the abnormal trading volume could serve as a proxy for overconfidence. However, compared to other more developed markets, the behavioral bias in China does not lead to a negative performance – at least on the short one-month horizon, which is the focus of the research. The study suggests that more sophisticated investors do not utilize these inefficiencies over the following month, and the strategy that bets on the most overconfident stocks is profitable.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of A-share stocks listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets. The data is sourced from the China Stock Market & Accounting Research (CSMAR) database. Firstly, construct the proxy for overconfidence using time-series regressions with monthly data (the paper does not specify the number of observations that are used, but we assume that it’s a one-year period which is the same as the author uses in other parts of the research). For each stock and each month, the trading volume is explained by a constant and the total trading volume for all stocks in the market. Estimate the regressions and compute the residuals, which are the proxy for the abnormal trading volume (ATV). Each month, stocks are firstly sorted into two size groups – small and big based on the median market cap at month t-1. Secondly, sort the stocks based on the median ATV over the prior month into two groups. Long the big overconfident and small overconfident portfolios and short the big low confident and small low confident portfolios. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Not mentioned.