Investor meetings with candidate firms have become an inseparable part of modern capital markets. The most common forms of these meetings involve investors traveling to firms’ headquarters to meet face to face with firms’ top management and discuss the direction of the company, observe prototypes and other work in progress, and lastly inspect production facilities. In this paper, the institutional investors’ resource allocation decisions are examined through in-person meetings between investors and firms. The research focuses on meetings initiated by buy-side investors. These meetings involve allocating limited resources toward a select subset of the investable universe of firms. Further, the paper examines the relationship between investor meetings and the cross-section of future stock returns.
The main hypothesis of this research is that the frequency of meetings between investors and firms is indicative of the extent of underpricing.
Secondly, it is discovered that when decomposing investor meetings into an expected component based on observable firm-characteristics and an abnormal component, the abnormal component has strong predictive power for returns. Thirdly, the research suggests that institutional investors disproportionately allocate resources to in-person meetings with underpriced firms and commonly rely on these face-to-face interactions to calibrate arbitrage opportunities before investing. To sum it up, the results suggests that in the Chinese markets (where the firms are obliged to disclose such meetings), the frequency of such meeting has a predictive power of subsequent returns.

Fundamental reason
The frequency of meetings between investors and firms is a great characteristic and indicative of the extent of underpricing firms. This is due to institutional investors tend to disproportionately allocate their portfolios toward long positions relative to short positions. Hence, investors are more likely to come upon positive signals about firms’ value compared to negative signals.
The obtained data from SZSE indicates that approximately 75% of investor meetings first occur before the institutional investors initiate a position. Further, announced in-person meetings are a recurring feature of the institutional vetting process. Furthermore, the data shows that more than half of all SZSE listed firms meet with institutions in a given year, and hosting firms meet with institutions approximately four times per year on average. There is also considerable cross-sectional variation in these meetings.
The key assumption of the whole strategy relies on fact that institutional allocation of time and attention across firms is driven by an expected return component and a mechanical component summarized by observable firm characteristics. The authors develop a simple model to identify firms with abnormally frequent investor meetings relative to the firms’ size, liquidity, and past-performance profile. More specifically, they run cross-sectional regressions of meeting frequency on firm characteristics each month. The model uses the regression residual as a signal of abnormal investor meetings (AIM). The tests show abnormal investor meetings predict firms’ stock returns. On average, firms in the highest quintile of abnormal meetings (high AIM firms) outperform the lowest quintile (low AIM firms).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks with common shares from the China Stock Market & Accounting Research (CSMAR) database, listed in the Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE).
Firstly, the strategy calculates calendar-time portfolio returns based on abnormal investor meetings (AIM). AIM is the residual value from a monthly regression of log one plus a number of investor meetings for firm in the past three months regressed on the log of firms’ circulation market cap (SIZE), average monthly turnover in the past 12 months (TURN), cumulative returns in past 12 months (MOMEN), and return on total assets (ROA). Higher values of the AIM correspond to firms that have more investor meetings than expected, given their size, liquidity, and past performance profile. Secondly, sort the cross-section firms into quintiles at the end of each month, based on their most recent level of AIM, which is estimated from the monthly regression. The strategy takes a long position in firms within the highest quintile and a short position in firms within the lowest quintile. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly and are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not include any information about the performance in relation to the market or during crises