Stock price behavior around ex-dividend days has been a topic for many academics and researchers throughout history. In perfect capital markets, the stock price drop should equal the amount of the dividend paid out on the ex-dividend day. However, many academics have shown over the past decades that it’s not the case. The price pressure by investors seeking dividends leads to positive abnormal returns before ex-dividend days and a subsequent reversal. Over the past decades, several reasons have been offered to explain this phenomenon. Although, just recently, studies have incorporated behavioral aspects to explain stock price patterns around recurring corporate events, such as dividend payments. In this paper, the authors examine the stock price behavior around recurring corporate events by studying how an exogenous shock impacts the decision-making of investors. More specifically, the analyses confirm the price pressure explanation of Hartzmark and Solomon (2013) and highlight the vital role of dividend-chasing investors in the predictable evolution of stock prices around ex-dividend dates.
In practice, a few days before the ex-dividend date, the stock price raises and subsequently falls after. Therefore, this effect can be easily utilized by buying stocks shortly before their ex-dividend dates and selling them at (right before) the ex-dividend date. The COVID-19 pandemic has induced a severe drop in both the number of dividend-paying firms and the amounts distributed. Therefore, the effect was (is) even stronger during COVID-19. However, we present only results for the pre-COVID period – the results for the more standard market conditions.

Fundamental reason
In recent years studies have shown that behavioral aspects have a major impact on stock prices and patterns around recurring corporate events, such as dividend payments. Supply and demand for dividend-paying stocks are likely to shift a few days before the ex-dividend day as some investors buy the stock to capture the dividend. It will attract arbitrageurs who will profit from offsetting price movements due to this dividend-motivated trading. If a demand overhang exists, and arbitrageurs cannot counterbalance it, stock prices should increase (Eades et al., 1985, Hartzmark and Solomon, 2013). If price pressure is responsible for positive abnormal returns before dividend payments, one ought to observe a decrease in prices after the ex-dividend day (Lakonishok and Vermaelen, 1986, Hartzmark and Solomon, 2013). The pattern in prices mentioned above had termed the dividend month premium. Different explanations for this phenomenon have been proposed in the literature. It includes the catering theory (Baker and Wurgler, 2004) or investors’ lack of attention in the stock price reduction from the cum-dividend to ex-dividend dates (Hartzmark and Solomon, 2019).
Additionally, the effect is stronger for periods where dividends are not paid or are cut (such as recent COVID crisis). There is a lower number of stocks that pay dividends, and as a result, the dividend investors reach for the stocks that are available. Subsequently, the upward price pressure is even stronger, and the anomaly is even more profitable.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of publicly-listed Western European companies. The sample is limited to companies traded in their own country, and they had to be active in July 2020. Furthermore, the stock price must be above EUR 1.00, and the market capitalization higher than EUR 50 million. Since the effect is stronger in the high yield stocks, consider only stocks in the upper quartile of dividend yields. Five days before the ex-dividend date take a long position in high-dividend stocks and rebalance on the ex-dividend date.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - If there is a high reach for the dividend stocks, the strategy is even more profitable than during the “normal” times (as shown in the paper using the COVID crisis)