The role of human capital in firm performance has been becoming more and more critical over the past decades. Innovation, quality and management efficiency belongs to the crucial factors of firms success, and all of these factors depend mainly on human capital. Therefore, it is up to each company to treat its employees according to their value. Already examined studies have shown, that companies with rising employee satisfaction (further ES) notably outperform companies with declining ES, and also that firms with similar ES must share similar firm fundamentals. More findings show that one company’s ES can influence other companies. For instance, when one firm implements a new employee welfare policy, the other firm may also implement a similar (or the same) policy to maintain its competitive advantage.
Now, the research from Xueying Bian et al. focuses on the implications of ES similarity across firms on market price discovery and firms’ stock returns. To determine the ES, the study applies Glaasoor data, that provides an overall rating of firms’ ES composed from five sub-categories: Culture & Values, Work/Life Balance, Senior Management, Compensation & Benefits, and Career Opportunities.
In the span of 9 years (2010 – 2018), the study ranks each year the top 1000 firms listed in the U.S. market (excluding financial firms) according to their Glassdoor rating from June of the previous year. Each firm’s predicted return is then calculated as a value-weighted average of last month’s/year’s returns from 40 other companies, which are ranked on 20 positions above and 20 positions under the focal firm in the ES ranking. Rebalancing monthly/yearly, the technique of going long the top quintile of firms with the highest expected return and going short the lowest brings an average annual return of 12,95% (2010 – 2018).
Further, the study tests, whether this anomaly cannot be subsumed by some other effects, such as industry momentum effect, supplier and customer industry returns, strategic alliance partners’ returns or even geographic peers returns. The results of all these tests convincingly demonstrate that the return predictability across firms with similar ES is distinct from the return predictability arising from industry linkages or other inter-firm connections. Other conclusions are that this phenomenon is supported only for firms with origin in countries with the flexible labour market, and a larger part of the return anomaly is realized during earnings announcement days.

Fundamental reason
Having a high ES brings the company many essential advantages. The first is motivation. Employees are more likely to self-identify with the job and are motivated to put more effort into their work or even bring new innovative ideas.
The second could be the company’s attractiveness. The firms associated with a high level of ES tend to be more attractive for a talented workforce. Nowadays, when the competition for talents is not limited to the rivals with the same industry, a high level of employee satisfaction becomes a universal firm advantage.
At last, maybe the most crucial advantage is the retention of employees. Firms with a higher level of employee satisfaction will suffer less when the industry or the entire economy experiences shocks. For instance, during recessions, firms with a relatively high level of employee satisfaction are more likely to demonstrate a better performance due to the high motivation of their employees and low talented employee turnover.
Regarding the anomaly, the study test three possible explanations: investors’ inattention, limits to arbitrage, and information complexity. Overall, the results support all of the three possibilities, but the investors’ inattention prooves to be the key factor. The evidence shows that firms with fewer investors’ attention (according to: stock turnover, analyst coverage, and institutional ownership) will show a more sluggish stock price reaction to the information from firm peers with similar ES.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks in Glassdoor data index (index used to rank firms based on Employee Satisfaction – ES). Each month, investor calculates the value-weighted average of last month’s/year’s returns from 40 other companies, which are ranked on 20 positions above and 20 positions under the focal firm in the ES ranking. Buy stocks of 200 firms, which have the best performing peers over the last period. Short-sell stocks of 200 firms, which have the worst-performing peers. Stocks in the portfolio are held for 1-year, and the portfolio is rebalanced on a monthly basis – therefore, each month, 1/12 of a portfolio is rebalanced based on ES score.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.