Empirical studies show that even when the finance theory predicts a positive risk-return relationship, the low-risk stocks outperform high-risk stocks on a risk-adjusted basis, and it is called low-risk anomaly or low-risk effect. Persistence of such an anomaly is one of the biggest mysteries in modern finance. In recent literature, there is strong evidence in favour of a low-risk effect with a flat (negative) risk-return relationship based on the simple average (compounded) returns. It is documented that low-risk effect is independent of size, value, and momentum effects, and it is robust after controlling for variables like liquidity and ticket-size of stocks.

It is further documented that low-risk effect is a combination of stock and sector level effects, and it cannot be captured fully by concentrated sector exposure. By integrating the momentum effect with the low-volatility effect, the performance of a low-risk investment strategy can be improved both in absolute and risk-adjusted terms. The source paper also analyzes other alternatives with Fama-French three and four-factor model and stress them besides others with CAGR, sector profile, Sharpe ratio, ex-ante and ex-post beta, CAPM style one-factor alpha over equal-weight universe portfolio…

In India, NSE launched the NSE Low-Volatility 50 Index in November 2012 with a base date of December 31, 2003, and the index has delivered superior returns to all major market-cap weighted benchmark indices, including bellwether Nifty Index both in absolute and risk-adjusted terms. However, low-volatility investing in India is yet to pick up. There is only one ETF tracking this index launched by ICICI prudential mutual fund in India, and its AUM is too small to mention. That said, the scope for low-volatility investment strategies in India is immense.

Fundamental reason
The low-risk portfolio delivers high-positive alpha, whereas high-risk portfolio has high-negative alpha. This effect also remains robust after controlling for size, value, and momentum factors; moreover, it remains robust after controlling for ticket-size and liquidity exposures. The sector exposure doesn’t affect the strategy, which means the low-risk effect is both macro (sector level) and micro (sector level) effect. Contrary to developed markets, where low-risk portfolios have significant sector concentration towards real estate and utility sectors, low-risk portfolio in Indian markets is less concentrated, and the sector concentration is even less than the broad-based market index. To mention relative performances, the low-risk portfolio has an alpha of 5.24% over equally weighted investment universe and high-risk portfolio on the other hand negative alpha of -6.96. The risk of these portfolios is relatively high – the Sharpe ratio for low-risk portfolio is 0.72 with return of 13.28% and it’s decreasing through quintiles with higher risk.

The power of adding high momentum filter while constructing low-risk investment strategy is visible in strategy’s alpha of 10.60% or simple return 17.79% with volatility at almost the same level of 18.06 what results in Sharpe ratio of 0.99. All risk quintile portfolios constructed from the investment universe of high momentum stocks deliver superior absolute and risk-adjusted performance over corresponding pure risk-quintile portfolios. Making portfolio market neutral by adding a short leg of the strategy with high-risk, low momentum quintile subtracted 6.95% from the performance, but the alpha still remains positive.

Simple trading strategy
Sort the stocks listed on National Stock Exchange of India by market capitalization and then pick the top 500 stocks by size with available returns for at least 12 months out of the previous 36 months. Momentum factor for each stock is calculated using the previous 12-month minus 1-month total return. Volatility factor for each stock is calculated using volatility of monthly excess returns (over risk-free returns) of the past three years.

Double-sort the investment universe based on momentum factor and then by the volatility factor. Make two sets (high and low momentum) of equal-weighted risk quintiles. Go long (short) quintile with the highest (lowest) momentum factor and the lowest (highest) volatility factor. Rebalance portfolio at the start of each month by the end of month data.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk, therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during time of market crisis.