Post Earnings-Announcement Drift is a well-documented anomaly concerning firms that are bound to periodically inform the public about their earnings and financial position. In simple terms, it can be explained as a pricing correction due to an exogenous shock that causes the prices to converge to a new equilibrium relative to the expectations of the earnings ex-ante. In recent years, the academic debate conjectured that PEAD — as it is commonly abbreviated — is subject to dissipation, and its statistical significance has deteriorated. In this work, the authors show that this is not the case as they redefine the PEAD using a larger non-trivial textual dataset that provides for a signal they call the PEAD.txt. This analysis parses the earnings calls without including the earnings numbers and constructs an aggregate PEAD measure using a regularized logistic text regression. This approach combines a traditional approach with NLP and shows that the information contained in the PEAD is more nuanced than the standardized unexpected earnings measure. It also leads to interesting new questions that enable them to contribute to the literature of domain knowledge-based paragraph classification that can help entangle more complex relationships within the asset-pricing kernel. They show that their signal is orthogonal and robust across the typical cross-sectional characteristics and that the portfolio spread is significant, which hints that the PEAD retains its strong evidence in the markets.

Fundamental reason
Market participants forecast earnings and other financial figures about respective companies to model their cash-flows and their value. These figures are often hard to predict and analysts’ views and consensus can change rapidly conditional on new announcements. Given the fact that their expectations are not independent of this new information, they update their views, and so the price can drift in the days or in some cases weeks following the announcement. With PEAD.txt, this announcement extends to textual features represented in the earnings call data that might incorporate information such as overall sentiment, change of strategy or other predictors that are not contained in the simple unexpected earnings measure. Thus, there is an added predictive benefit that can be exploited for additional alpha using a suitable model specification. In this way, PEAD.txt is a slight misnomer as it does contain not only data contained in the surprises but also the surprises of other ‘topics’ included in the content of the earnings call.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of CRSP stocks. The strategy considers the period starting 2008 and ending in 2019, with the transcripts being sourced from the Capital IQ Transcripts database. A standardized unexpected earnings text measure is created by fitting a regularized logistic text regression with the textual features and one-day abnormal returns as the target. The specification is that of an elastic net, and the model is retrained every quarter using a sliding window of past eight quarters as well as cross-validated for the L1 and L2 shrinkage values based on a 10-fold CV. The target variable is labelled according to the definition on page 11 with a high and low boundary on the positive and negative returns and a flat no equilibrium change as a base state. The features use a bag-of-words model with one-word and two-word combinations and their log-frequencies defining a feature matrix. The training includes the whole earnings call with Q&A and main sections. The portfolio is then formed on the day following the earnings call that goes long the top quintile of the predicted log-odds of the surprise measure constructed by the model and shorts the bottom quintile, forming a long-short portfolio. This process is then repeated next quarter until the end of the sample. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced quarterly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Probably - According to Table 7, returns are not related to the market factor (beta of -0.003). Therefore, the results suggest that the strategy is unrelated to the equity market.