Researchers from Bar-Ilan University explore the performance of the distance between short- and long-run moving averages of prices, called MAD, in predicting future returns on 92 international market-wide indices. Regressing monthly decile-based zero-cost portfolio returns in U.S. dollars on the Fama-French and momentum factors in the three/five developed/emerging markets generates statistically significant alphas. The basis of the MAD strategy takes a long (short) position in the top (bottom) MAD decile, provided that MAD is above (below) unity. As for our choice, we suggest deploying variants in developed economies only, with honorable 30 years of curated data.

Fundamental reason
International MAD portfolios produce statistically and economically significant alphas and Sharpe ratios that are significantly higher than global index benchmarks’ ratios. Avramov et al. (2021) propose MAD as a predictor for the U.S. stock returns in the cross-section. They propose that MAD predictability is caused by investors anchoring to long-run moving stock price averages, providing evidence that MAD predicts future returns of international market indices. Investing according to MAD yields abnormal profits that do not reverse over time, consistent with investor underreaction to information and the anchoring explanation for MAD. Anchoring to long-run moving averages of prices is a global phenomenon that applies also to market-wide indices. Obtaining abnormal profits in practice is relatively straightforward because MAD profitability comes mainly from the long-side portfolio, and it is enormous in developed economies, which are more accessible. This evidence can be explained via the findings in the literature that increasing correlations across markets and market co-movements are country-, region-, and time-dependent. These results indicate that international diversification is still adequate and offers significant economic benefits in general and within developed countries. The profitability of MAD does not depend on momentum and a single definition of the underlying periods of MAD. Moreover, MAD performance is intact when investing is confined to developed economies or developed markets.

Simple trading strategy
The group denoted as Developed Markets, which includes the MSCI 25 developed markets, is to be taken as the designated investment universe.
(The daily values of the international markets indices are taken from the global Thomson Reuters DataStream database. The exchange rates are retrieved from the St. Louis Federal Reserve website, FRED. [Also, in case if needed, use Fama and French’s (2012, 2016, 2017) international risk factors for developed and emerging markets, taken from the Kenneth French website. The U.S. risk-free rates may also be obtained from that website.])

Variable calculation: Based on the methodology of Avramov et al. (2021), MAD is calculated for each market on the last trading day of the month. The MAD values are calculated using MV of closing prices in local currencies, consistent with the anchoring rationale. The MAD (eq. (1)) is defined as the division of MA(30), which is the MV of the market index value for the past 30 calendar days, and MA(300), which is the same for the past 300 calendar days.
Classifying investment execution rule: The long-side (short-side) MAD portfolio includes the markets in the top (bottom) decile or quintile but only if MAD is above (below) unity (a zero threshold to incorporate the anchoring reasoning).

Portfolios shall be rebalanced monthly and are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The authors do not indicate the strategy’s applicability during market turmoil when most equities space downturns occur.