Usually, portfolios are constructed based on signals which serve as proxies for the conditional expected return. For example, traditional momentum can be considered as a signal. The past outperformance (underperformance) indicates positive (negative) expected return. However, such signals must be considered as own-asset predictive signals. No doubt, own-asset signals can be a profitable way to construct portfolios, but they lack cross-predictability.
This novel research overcomes the lack of cross-predictability by considering a prediction matrix that tracks both the own-signal prediction effects and all cross-predictability phenomena where asset j’s signal predicts asset i’s return. Furthermore, singular value decomposition is used (similar to the principal components analysis – PCA), and singular vectors of the prediction matrix are characterized as principal portfolios. Based on the used signal (for example momentum), such portfolios are normalized portfolios ordered from most predictable to those least predictable. Therefore, it is a similar result to PCA where the vectors are ordered from those explaining the most variance to those that explain the least variance. The difference is that principal portfolios use a prediction matrix and not a covariance matrix.
The benefit of the most predictable principal portfolios is that they are the most timeable portfolios, and they are connected with the highest unconditional expected returns. Based on the construction, it is natural that the principal portfolios can be a base of strategy that goes long top principal portfolios, and paper shows this strategy using Fama-French double sorted value and size portfolios and momentum signal.
Additionally, the paper proposes two additional decompositions of a symmetric part and an antisymmetric part of the prediction matrix. According to the paper, classification as either symmetric or antisymmetric, amazingly translate into either beta or alpha. Eigenvectors of the symmetric part of the prediction matrix are optimal ways to achieve factor exposure, or in other words, beta. On the other hand, eigenvectors of the antisymmetric part are optimal factor-neutralized strategies or alpha.

Fundamental reason
Singular vectors are leading components of the prediction matrix and are defined as components that are responsible for the largest part of covariation between signals and future returns. Therefore, singular vectors are important and valuable for the cross-predictability. Compared to own-asset predictive signals, principal portfolios are informative about the joint dynamics in signals and subsequent returns. Aforementioned can be attributed as the main reason for the functionality.
The resulting singular vectors (principal portfolios) are ordered from the most to the least predictable by the signal that is used for the construction of the prediction matrix. Therefore, the practitioner is able to time his portfolio by considering top principal portfolios which offer the most substantial expected returns.
Additionally, while the theory would certainly hold in-sample, the paper has identified that the principal portfolios also work in the out-of-sample, which is a crucial condition for the construction of profitable portfolios. Moreover, the portfolios are profitable across various forecast horizons, investment universes or momentum lookback periods. Therefore, the strategy can be considered as robust.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 25 double sorted Fama-French size-value portfolios.

Firstly, for each asset, the signal is defined as a 20-day momentum computed as the past 20-day cumulative return, which is standardized for each period by converting it to a cross-sectional rank, dividing by the number of assets and subtracting the mean.

Secondly, to measure returns, consider each asset’s 20-day return. Returns are cross-sectionally demeaned. The sample of the paper is divided into non-overlapping 20-day time periods, denoted by t. In each period t, the aim is to predict the future 20-day returns based on the momentum signals. The prediction matrix is defined as the expected value of the vector of returns at time t+1 multiplied by the transposed vector of signals at time t. In practice, the prediction matrix is estimated by using past 120 time periods. The estimate is computed as the average matrix of past 120 vectors of returns multiplied by the transposed vectors of signals (equation 47).

Nextly, using singular value decomposition compute singular vectors of prediction matrix that form principal portfolios (equations 12). Decomposition yield an orthogonal matrix U multiplied by the diagonal matrix of singular values multiplied by the transpose of orthogonal matrix V. The principal portfolios are linear strategies where the k-th position matrix is defined as k-th column vector of U times transposed k-th column vector of V, and the k-th principal portfolio is defined as transposed signal multiplied by the position matrix (equation 13).

Finally, the position is taken in the top three principal portfolios. The strategy is equally-weighted (across top three portfolios) and rebalanced every 20-days (one month).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide any information about the usage of the strategy as a hedge.