The Book-to-Market (BM) ratio is notoriously known in the financial world and represents the value of a firm. The BM is obtained by dividing the book value of a firm by its market value. Novel research investigates the predictive power of the time-series volatility of BM ratio, suggesting that this volatility could be viewed as a measure of value uncertainty. The research has found that the stocks that exhibit high standard deviation of their estimated end-of-year book value scaled by the market value of equity (BM) earn a premium above standard cross-sectional predictors, including price and earnings momentum, investment, proﬁtability and even the book-to-market ratio itself. On the other hand, stocks with low UNC factor (or with a low standard deviation of BM) are connected with an underperformance. However, the performance of the high UNC stocks is more economically and statistically significant, and therefore the strategy could be with a great success formed as the long-only. The simple long-short strategy that is based on the value uncertainty consists of going long stocks with the high UNC and shorting stocks with UNC. To sum it up, according to the paper, the value uncertainty (UNC) captures an equity premium that is not explained by common risk factors previously considered in the literature. The reported value uncertainty premium is signiﬁcant both statistically and economically and is robust to various scrutiny levels and robustness checks. Moreover, the research has also been made using the 500 largest NYSE stocks, which ensures that the small and illiquid stocks do not drive the strategy’s performance.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, high-UNC stocks are connected with productivity and consumption risks. Therefore, risk-averse investor demands extra compensation in the form of higher expected return when holding high-UNC stocks. Additionally, if the ﬁrm’s productivity covaries positively with consumption growth, high-UNC will lead to high exposure to a systematic risk factor and consequently, high expected returns. The aforementioned provides a risk-based justiﬁcation for the signiﬁcant positive premium of high-UNC ﬁrms. The paper concludes that the high-UNC premium might be partly driven by lower information quality, and higher uncertainty in future proﬁtability, inducing feedback effects on BM. Further, high-UNC may also increase a ﬁrm’s return exposure to broad systematic risk factors.
Additionally, alphas of stocks in the highest UNC decile are all positive as well as economically and statistically signiﬁcant. In contrast, the corresponding alphas of stocks in the lowest UNC decile are economically and statistically insigniﬁcant. Therefore, the signiﬁcantly positive alpha spread between the low- and high-UNC stocks is due to outperformance by high-UNC stocks and is not caused by the underperformance of low-UNC stocks. Moreover, ﬁndings indicate that the volatility of estimated book-to-market ratios is not explained by any established risk factors, whether the factor is the market, size, value (BM), investment, proﬁtability, momentum or liquidity factors. Lastly, the strategy is robust to various scrutiny levels and robustness checks and is not driven by the small illiquid stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 500 largest NYSE stocks. Firstly, calculate the Uncertainty of book-to-market (UNC). The UNC is simply computed as the standard deviation of the time series of daily expected book-to-market (BM) ratios scaled by their mean over the previous 12 months (equation 11, page 13). Where the expected book-to-market ratio is computed as the expected book value of equity at the end of year y, calculated based on the last available book value of equity of ﬁrm in quarter q of year y obtained from the balance sheet, plus estimated net income available from analysts on a given day d minus expected dividends divided by the market value of equity of ﬁrm i on day d, obtained as the product of total shares outstanding and stock price on day d (see the equations 7-10 at pages 11 and 12). Sort the stocks into deciles and long the top decile and short the bottom decile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on the source research paper (see table 8), the strategy has a strongly positive performance during bad economic states therefore probably can be used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets.