Past performance is a major factor in deciding whether to make an investment in a particular asset or not. Recent award-winning paper (NAAIM 2016) offers a framework, which identifies a relationship between the past performance of an asset (or a group of assets) and its future returns, using multivariate regression analysis. The finding then led the author to formulate a trading strategy, which represents an interesting alternative to passive index investments (such as S&P 500) that are carried out through ETFs and mutual funds. While the strategy still focuses on large-cap stocks included in S&P 500, it implements sector rotation – a strategy which, in this case, dynamically picks sector ETFs based on the results of multivariate regression analysis. While the up capture ratio is less than 100% with 72%, its power lies primarily in the downside protection with the down capture ratio of 52%. As a result, the strategy outperforms the benchmark index (S&P 500) both in terms of raw return and risk (lower standard deviation and maximum drawdown).

Fundamental reason
S&P 500 is a market-cap weighted index; therefore, passive investment in this index means that most of the investment goes to the largest companies, not the best-performing ones. Dividing the index into several sectors, the author found that the best-performing sector over a chosen look-back period accounted for only 3% in the index. The rules-based strategy could hold the relevant best performing sectors more often in the portfolio.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 9 Select Sector SPDR ETFs, representing 9 of the sectors included in S&P 500, namely: Healthcare, Industrials, Consumer Discretionary, Consumer Staples, Materials, Technology, Utilities, Energy, and Financials. The return data are collected from Morningstar Direct. The investment process consists of several steps. Firstly, an investor calculates a set of independent variables (the multivariate regression analysis, including the definition of independent variables, is dealt with in detail on pages 7-11) at the beginning of the month, using a 12-month look-back horizon. Secondly, the investor puts the independent variables and regression coefficients into the regression formula. The investor allocates 1/9th of funds into each sector ETF that obtained a positive result and holds it for one month. The rest of the funds remains in cash. The portfolio is to be rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is a long-only, and as such has a strong exposition to equity market risk, therefore it can’t be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.