Institutional investors and their effect on anomalies have become a target of interest for many researchers, as they play a crucial role in the U.S. equity market. Research of Wu and Xu (2021) investigates whether information about entries and exits of informed investors can be used as a predictor of future stock returns. We call these fluctuations changes in ownership breadth. More specifically, changes in ownership breadth are understood as changes in the number of informed institutional investors that hold a stock. Authors assume that investors might have access to private information about future earnings and hence expect to find a positive correlation between changes in the number of informed institutional investors that long a stock and future stock performance. Indeed, they confirm their surmise. Following Stambough and Yuan (2017), they examine the interaction between 11 anomaly signals and changes in ownership breadth. Their improved anomaly-based strategy, which is buy (short) stocks in the long (short) legs of anomalies and in the top (bottom) breadth changes, outperforms the 11 original strategies. Their results show that performance of the long legs of anomalies following entries of informed institutional investors is positive, while performance of the short legs worsens following their exits. Present study extends the literature on anomalies and market efficiency as well as highlights the importance of the role of institutional investors in forecasting stock returns.

Fundamental reason
To better understand the sources of given anomaly-based strategy, authors of the study test two plausible explanations: informed trading hypothesis and short-selling constraints. According to the informed trading hypothesis, informed institutional investors might possess private information on future earnings surprises. Changes in the ownership breadth, by which we understand changes in the number of investors holding a stock, then work as an indicator of future price changes. The entries and exits thereby predict future stock returns. Authors support this theory by testing and confirming the assumption that controlling for future earnings surprises eliminates the forecasting power of breadth changes. The second hypothesis states that this predictive power can be explained by short-selling constraints. However, it only explains negative alpha for the short leg of the breadth changes, not positive alpha for the long leg. Furthermore, the study provides evidence of its insignificance.

Simple trading strategy
The dataset consists of all NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq common stocks. The sample period lasts from May 1981 to May 2018. Following entities are excluded: stocks with share prices less than one dollar at the beginning of the portfolio formation date and firms in the financial sectors. Data is obtained from various sources; accounting data are from the Annual and Quarterly CRSP/Compustat Merged database, stock return data are from the CRSP monthly files, the institutional investor holdings data are from Thomson Reuters Institutional (13f) holdings S34 files. Each time there is a difference between the filing date and the reporting date, Thomson Reuters 13f’s split adjustment is reversed using CRSP cumulative shares and a price adjustment factor. On top of that, the institutional investor’s holdings data are merged with CRSP and CRSP/Compustat using CUSIP numbers and report dates. To make sure the strategies are tradable, leave a two-month gap between the variables from institutional holdings data and portfolio formation. Then, sort all stocks into three tercile portfolios based on quarterly changes in ownership breadth. This way, stocks in the top (bottom) tercile, so-called LOW (HIGH) group, are those with the most negative (positive) changes in ownership breadth in the prior quarter. After that, sort stocks into five quintile portfolios within each breadth change group according to each of the 11 anomaly variables. These include asset growth (AG), failed probability (FP), gross profitability (GP), investment-asset (IA), long-term equity issuance (LSI), momentum (MOM), net operating assets (NOA), net payout (NPAY), net stock issuance (NSI), operating accruals (OA), o-score (OS), and return on assets (ROA). In accordance with the improved strategy, buy (short) stocks in the long (short) legs of anomalies and in the highest (lowest) ownership breadth changes tercile portfolio. Portfolios are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Not presented.