Profits from momentum strategies can earn relatively high profits across different asset classes. Therefore, it attracted the attention of many academics and investors. However, prior studies primarily investigate momentum in the U.S. and developed markets. Almost no attention is given to momentum strategies in emerging market countries. Rouwenhorst (1999) and Griffin Kelly, and Nardari (2010) have found that momentum returns are lower in emerging markets than developed markets. This paper analyzes momentum returns in emerging markets by exploring the possible explanations for their lower relative profitability.
The authors confirm that momentum returns in emerging market countries are relatively lower than in the developed markets such as the U.S. market. As a contribution to momentum returns in emerging markets, time-series properties of momentum returns in emerging markets are analyzed. Firstly, is discovered that momentum profits have significant nonpositive exposure to both excess market returns and liquidity. The strong optionality effect is one of the suggested explanations for the overall lower momentum return in emerging market countries. Consequently, it is suggested that the relationship between momentum returns and the market factor in DMSs (down market states) is asymmetric in emerging markets. Secondly, the authors suggest that momentum returns are linked to market liquidity as well. Because of the nonpositive exposure of the momentum strategy to liquidity risk, the study is suggesting that there is no liquidity premium associated with momentum in emerging markets.
Furthermore, the ability to mitigate momentum crashes in emerging market countries using risk management strategies is a key result of the paper. Corroborating Barroso and Santa-Clara (2015) findings which show that volatility in the previous formation year of the momentum strategy is negatively related to momentum returns in the U.S. into the emerging markets, the momentum crashes are more likely to occur when the lagged volatility of momentum returns is high. Followig Barroso and Santa-Clara (2015) risk adjustment methods, the momentum strategy is scaled by the inverse of the prior year’s volatility/variance in each country. This adjustment improved the performance of the momentum strategy across all emerging markets.

Fundamental reason
The strong optionality effect proposed by Daniel and Moskowitz (2016) is one of the optional explanations for the overall lower momentum return in emerging market countries. Due to the optionality effect, the average momentum return for emerging market countries is reduced.
The possibility of momentum crashes and the subsequent negative impacts on the portfolio can be mitigated by using risk management strategies. Further, Barroso and Santa-Clara (2015) findings show the volatility in the previous formation year of the momentum strategy is negatively related to momentum returns in the U.S. market. When the researchers applied this finding in emerging markets, the momentum crashes are more likely to occur when the lagged volatility of momentum returns is high. Followig Barroso and Santa-Clara (2015) risk adjustment methods, the momentum strategy is scaled by the inverse of the prior year’s volatility/variance in each country. This adjustment improved the performance of the momentum strategy across all emerging markets.
To conclude, if the optionality effect proposed by Daniel and Moskowitz (2016) is reduced and the traditional momentum strategy is scaled by the lagged volatility or variance of momentum returns, the performance of momentum strategies in emerging market countries improves significantly.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks from Thomson Reuters DataStream classified as “Emerging Markets” by Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI). Specifically: Brazil, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Egypt, Greece, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Turkey.
Firstly, the strategy ranks stocks in each country into quintiles based on their average returns in the formation period of twelve months, where the last month is skipped to alleviate the known contrarian effect. Holding period returns for each stock in month t are retained within each quintile. Secondly, sort the stocks into quintiles. The momentum strategy goes long, the winner portfolio and shorts the loser portfolio.
To implement risk management procedures, construct variance scaled series of momentum profits for each emerging market country. The variance is calculated from the 126 formation period days of momentum returns (equation 2). The scaled strategies are constructed by dividing momentum returns by the inverse of the previous 126 days’ variance of momentum returns and multiplying it by a constant which can be interpreted as the target variance, to normalize the variance of the scaled momentum strategy. The constant is chosen such that the variances of traditional and scaled momentum are equal. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly and equally-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Its a long-short equity strategy.