Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) are top-rated investment security among investors. Nowadays, we can observe the increasing popularity of Leveraged Exchange Traded Funds (LETFs). They are designed to provide a greater return than the regular ETF, but, on the other hand, they are becoming very risky in the long term. LETF reproduces a multiple (m) of a benchmark ETF return over one day. Typically, m equals 2 (double LETF) or 3 (triple LETF).
Carver (2009) shows that the daily rebalancing of LETFs may cause a decline in the value of these instruments over time and consequently lead to zero value. In addition, Guedj et al. (2010) report that retail investors hold LETFs for extended periods (three months). By doing so, they can lose up to 50% of their capital annually. Lastly, Dobi and Avellaneda (2012) showed that LETFs have negative returns compared to their underlying ETFs geared up to the same amount of leverage, the effect known as LETFs slippage. The author (Tosi) extended the previous research showing that LETF slippage is more significant in high-volatility asset classes. At the same time, he showed that LETFs portfolios could be used as a diversification tool in combination with their same asset class market portfolio.
Last but not least, the author constructed a simple trading strategy using the LETFs slippage effect. The strategy tells us to first pair LETFs with the ETFs by maximum correlation. Then, gear up every ETF to the same leverage level as their paired LETF. And finally, sell LETFs and buy (sell) corresponding ETFs if the correlation between them is positive (negative).

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of this strategy is the difference in returns of LETFs and the underlying geared ETFs with the same leverage degree over multiple days. Let’s take a look at a simple example from the paper. At day zero, ETF has a value of 100. A double LETF (which tracks given ETF) has its own capital of 100 in cash and a total return swap exposure of 200. On day one, ETF increases by 10%, and subsequently, on day two decreases by 10%. The value of ETF on day two is equal to 99. On the other hand, the value of LETF increases on the first day by 20%, and on day two, it decreases by 20%. The final value of LETF’s own capital on day two is 96. To sum it up, the decrease in 2x ETF is 2*1%=2%, while the decrease in the LETF is 4%. This effect is known as LETF slippage.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of US-listed ETFs and LETFs traded on the market. The data come from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRPS) and ETF Global (ETFG) databases. It is required for every security to have at least 240 observations during the year before the portfolio construction and data available the day before the portfolio construction. Only double and triple LETFs with positive or negative exposure are considered.

Firstly, each month, the day before the portfolio construction, calculate the correlations between all LETFs and ETFs using daily returns over the previous year. Secondly, pair each LETF to the ETF with which it exhibits the largest absolute correlation. To create the pair, at least 50% absolute correlation is required. Subsequently, gear up all the ETFs to the same leverage level as their paired LETFs. Thirdly, each month, sell LETFs and buy (sell) corresponding paired ETFs if the correlation is positive (negative). Finally, construct a final portfolio as the equally weighted average of all the ETF-LETF pairs

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - LETP strategies have performed exceptionally well in the 2008 crisis. Hence, the main analysis of this paper excludes 2008 crisis to put all asset classes on an equal foot.

Therefore, we would like to direct avid traders to do more research for applying possible applications if they perform the main strategy.