In the light of the rising dominance of institutional investors in financial markets over the past two decades, the predictive power of institutional trading on stock returns has become one of the central issues in finance. Within the heterogeneous nature of institutional investors, hedge funds, in particular, differ from other institutional investors in terms of their structure and flexibility. While previous studies have provided only weak support for the informativeness of hedge funds’ trades, recent studies provide more robust evidence of informed trading by hedge funds. Motivated by the significant differences in the performance of hedge funds and other institutions (non-hedge funds), a study by Caglayan, Celiker, and Sonaer (2022) examines to what extent disagreements between hedge funds and non-hedge funds affect their stock trade performances. The paper defines strong disagreements as cases where stocks are heavily bought (sold) by hedge funds while contemporaneously heavily sold (bought) by non-hedge funds. The results have revealed that disagreements between hedge funds and non-hedge funds are twice as likely as agreements. Specifically, within stocks heavily sold (bought) by non-hedge funds, the number of stocks heavily bought (sold) by hedge funds is twice the number subject to the agreement between these two groups (i.e., jointly heavily sold or bought). In addition, the paper examines whether one group is better informed about their trades than the other. To this end, the authors measured the returns to bivariate quintile portfolios created by independently sorting stocks based on hedge fund and non-hedge fund trading in each quarter. A value-weighed quintile of heavily bought stocks by hedge funds and contemporaneously heavily sold by non-hedge funds (disagreement stocks) earned 0.39% characteristic-adjusted monthly return. Such a finding suggests that hedge funds’ buys are better informed than non-hedge funds’ sells. Naturally, the informational content of hedge funds and non-hedge funds trades can be utilized to form a profitable trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
Researchers Kim and Verrechia (1991) hypothesize that different quality of prior private information among investors leads to their different reactions to public news. To this end, the paper examines whether hedge funds and non-hedge funds differ in their trades with respect to firms’ earnings reports. While there is a strong positive relationship between earnings news and non-hedge fund trading, the paper finds no evidence of a link between earnings news and hedge fund trading. This finding indicates a greater reliance by non-hedge funds on public reports and past return trends, which may help disagreements to materialize more often. Moreover, the lack of significant differences in the returns of the disagreement sub-portfolios generated on past stock returns and earnings news suggest that better-informed hedge fund trading may be the main factor that drives the positive abnormal returns to the disagreement portfolio. Consistent with the notion of Kacperzyk and Seru (2007), higher-skilled fund managers’ trades are less reliant on public information.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all CRSP common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. First, eliminate stocks with share prices below $5, negative book equity, and fewer than 24 months of return data. Second, at the end of each quarter, calculate the institutional ownership ratio for each stock as the number of shares held by institutions divided by the total number of shares outstanding. Source the institutional holdings data from the quarterly 13F filings reports. Compute hedge fund and non-hedge fund ownership separately for each stock. Classify a 13F filer as a hedge fund institution if it meets the criteria described in section 2(3), otherwise as a non-hedge fund institution. Third, sort the stock universe into the value-weighted quintiles based on the change in the hedge fund ownership, where the lowest (highest) quintile contains stocks that experience the largest decrease (increase) in hedge fund ownership. Then, within each quintile, sort stocks into value-weighted quintiles based on the change in the non-hedge fund ownership, where the lowest (highest) quintile contains stocks that experience the largest decrease (increase) in non-hedge fund ownership. The trading rule for the strategy is as follows: each quarter, buy the quintile of stocks that are most heavily bought by hedge funds and most heavily sold by non-hedge funds (disagreement stocks) and sell the quintile of most heavily sold stocks by both types of institutions (agreement stocks). The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced quarterly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not exclusively state that the strategy could be used as a hedge. However, the performance seems to be relatively stable (Figure C). Still, there are some drawdowns, and the possible usage and relationship with crises should be carefully checked.