Options belong to one of the most popular instruments that investors use to construct their portfolio. They are becoming increasingly popular, because they bring many upsides, that other asset classes cannot provide. In the past, the original idea behind the creation of options was hedging against risk. However, in recent years, they have been increasingly emerging as a subject of traders speculation. This has also stimulated the formation of new trading strategies.
The research from Assaf Eisdorfer et al. (2020) also stands behind one of these newly formed strategies. Their paper explores and analyzes previously undocumented mispricing in the options markets, that could be taken advantage of to gain abnormal returns.
Even though the nominal price of an asset should not be related to expected returns, the prior research has shown, that investors are influenced by the price level. This idea was also confirmed by current research, where is shown, that options written on lower-priced stocks tend to be relatively more expensive than options written on higher-priced stocks. Using this knowledge, the authors present a unique trading strategy by constructing a delta-hedged call option decile portfolios, where options are sorted according to the underlying stock price. The delta-hedged portfolio of going long on the top decile and going short on the bottom decile of call options would bring a weekly return of 0,54% (1996-2017). The return equals to the total gain at the options expiration, scaled by the absolute value of the total cost of constructing portfolios at the formation date.
The presented idea is also supported by the examination of an experiment, where the researchers examine the effect of stock splits on option prices. Stock splits provide a unique situation, where the only changing variable is the underlying asset price. Following a stock split, the option price should be scaled proportionally to the underlying stock price. However, consistent with the hypothesis, the authors found evidence, that the prices of call options after stock splitting have relatively risen by 13% compared to their pre-split prices in the three-day window following the split.

Fundamental reason
The explanation behind this anomaly could be found in retail investors behaviour. The low-priced stock options attract more attention from these investors, while they seem to be cheap, and the investor can´t lose a lot when buying them. The demand for this kind of options then drives the prices up. This idea is supported by the finding that this effect is more robust with options written on stocks with lower institutional ownership, that do not bring much attention to professional traders. Also, it was found that the professional traders buying of options increases with the increasing price of the underlying stock. On the other hand, retail traders buying options is inversely related to the stock price. Therefore, it can be concluded that the anomaly exists because of retail investors that are irrationally pushing the prices up.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of options listed in the OptionMetrics Ivy DB database, whose expiry date is in the following month (the third Friday of the month). The data on the underlying stocks are obtained from CRSP/Compustat. For each underlying stock, a call option that is closest to at-the-money is picked. Only options with moneyness (ratio of stock price to strike price) between 0.7 and 1.3 are included, while options with zero open interest or trading volume are excluded as well. The options that meet these criteria are then sorted into deciles according to underlying asset prices (bottom decile = lowest stock prices, top decile = highest stock prices). The investor goes long on the top decile and short on the bottom decile. The portfolio is equally-weighted, delta-hedged and held until the maturity.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk, therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during time of market crisis.