Empirical research has primarily focused on the right tail of the return distribution. More specifically, on stocks characterized as lotteries due to investor’s preferences for lottery stocks. In contrast, this paper investigates the significance of extreme negative price changes on the cross-section of stocks return, which we can call hazard stocks. Contrary to lottery stocks which are prone to experience extreme positive returns, hazard stocks are prone to experience extreme negative returns. To better isolate firm-specific information shocks, idiosyncratic extreme minimum (IMIN) daily returns are calculated for each stock every month. IMIN is used to document the investors’ reactions to extreme negative idiosyncratic returns.
The paper is suggesting that the relation between lottery stocks and expected returns and that of hazard stocks and expected returns is not symmetric. What the main results suggest is that the market underreacts to hazards stocks, and does not discount hazard stocks in a manner that is consistent with lottery stock premiums. Specifically, firms with high IMIN have low returns in subsequent months. Overall, there is uncovered a striking difference between the investor’s preference for lottery stocks and hazard stocks.

Fundamental reason
Investors and traders are just ordinary people; therefore, they have a behavioral bias to attach high importance to positive news. Consequently, they choose stocks with high positive past price jumps, which are, therefore, stocks liable to overvaluation. As a result, investors pay a premium for lottery stocks but don’t discount hazard stocks as investors are rational but do not have rational expectations. Three potential explanations for the apparent under reaction to IMIN are explored: limited attention, structural uncertainty explanations, and limits to arbitrage. Surprisingly, initially, it is found that all three explanations significantly contribute to the documented underreaction when looked at separately. However, when all three explanations are examined simultaneously, it is found that information uncertainty and limits to arbitrage, but not limited attention, significantly contribute to the documented underreaction to IMIN. Overall, the results in this study suggest that either lottery preferences are asymmetric or IMIN does not proxy for hazard stock.
Last but not least, the performance of the strategy is driven mainly by the small caps; therefore, it is best to be extra cautious with the implementation in practice.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). Stocks are required to have at least 15 trading days within a month to be included in the sample. The main variable of interest, the monthly measure of idiosyncratic minimum return (IMIN), is the minimum of the residuals from the Carhart model within a month, which is calculated for each stock. Stocks are sorted into quintiles by IMIN.
The investment strategy goes long the highest IMIN quintile portfolio and shorts the lowest IMIN quintile portfolio. The portfolio is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide any information about hedging properties