Assets’ past one- to twelve-month returns are generally positive predictors of their future returns. This phenomenon is known as time-series momentum. The recent new variant of this time series momentum strategy increases its value with the cross-asset application through bond and equity markets. Academic research shows that past bond market returns are positive predictors of future equity market returns, while past equity market returns are negative predictors of future bond market returns. These cross-asset signals/predictors are used as an additional filter to time both equity and bond parts of the portfolio.

Fundamental reason
The effect of the cross-asset time-series momentum can be partly explained by slow-moving capital in bond and equity markets what is caused by inattention, time-consuming organisational decisionmaking, and frictions in funding capital markets. Positive bond market returns help address the problem of constrained investors in two ways. First, positive bond market returns are typically associated with declines in yields, thus lowering the investors’ cost of borrowing and improving their ability to obtain loans. Second, positive bond market returns increase the value of the constrained investors’ portfolios (assuming they hold bonds in their portfolios), thus giving them more collateral to bid for larger loans. As a result, when interest rates fall, investors can take on more leverage and increase their equity investments. This leads to an increase in equity demand and boosts equity returns. Future lending to commercial and industrial borrowers is consistently positively correlated with past equity market returns. Lenders can benefit from this apparent increase in the demand for new loans following positive equity market returns by extracting higher yields from the borrowers. This will have the effect of increasing bond yields more generally and thus lead to negative bond market returns. Equity market returns are positively correlated with changes in the risk-free rate. Since increases in the risk-free rate will also tend to push up longer-term bond yields, the result will be a broad, negative impact on bond market returns following periods of positive equity market returns, and vice versa.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of bond and equity indexes for 20 leading industrial countries of the world. As past equity returns are a negative predictor of future bond returns, when equity returns during the last 12 months are negative along with positive bond returns for previous 12 months, the investor takes a long position in bonds. In case both equity and bond returns in the last 12 months are positive, the investor goes long with equity because past bonds’ returns are a positive predictor of future equity returns. In any other case, the investor does not open a position and holds the capital in a dollar-denominated margin account earning the US risk-free rate. The holding period for both equities and bonds is one month. Portfolios for each country consist of bond and equity indexes and are targeted for 10% volatility. The shares of each country within the final portfolio are equally-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Futures trend-following/momentum strategies are a cornerstone of trend-following CTA funds and as such is an excellent candidate for an uncorrelated strategy and very often a hedge to equity market factor. The source research paper doesn’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; however, we can expect that strategy will probably retain a negative correlation to equities. Backtest would be helpful to determine correlation and hedging characteristics.