People like to extrapolate things from the past into the future. As a result, the over-extrapolation leads to predictability in returns around earnings announcements. Previous earnings announcement returns are strongly correlated with the next period’s post-earnings announcement returns. The pressure on stock prices is rising in the pre-earnings announcements period as a result of over-extrapolation of the recent positive earnings announcement. This causes significant fundamental risk right before the earnings announcement. After the announcement, fundamental risk decreases and stock prices tend to start reverting back to their “fundamental values”. We can build a profitable trading strategy based on this pattern. The strategy uses extrapolated return measure to define firms with expected good/bad results. The extrapolated return measure is a weighted average of returns from the firm’s past eight earnings announcements, where the earnings announcement is a two-day window composed of the day of the announcement and the following day. The investor then goes long the ﬁrms with expected really good earnings and short the firms with expected really bad earnings and holds them for five days right before the earnings announcement.

Fundamental reason
Individual investor purchasing behaviour is strongly influenced by past earnings announcement returns. Investors tend to be optimistic or pessimistic in the period leading up to the next earnings announcement date based on the previous periods. There is the assumption that if there is excess buying pressure in the period right before earnings (as the result of over-extrapolation), then there should be seen a rise in the price of the stock before earnings are announced and a fall in the stock price afterwards.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all US stocks from AMEX, Nasdaq and NYSE. They are divided into deciles based on the past earnings-announcement performance. The stocks are sorted based on the weighted average of the past eight quarterly earnings announcement returns. At the beginning of each trading day, the investor considers ﬁrms in the pre-earnings announcement window – the ﬁve days before the earnings announcement date. Then he goes long the ﬁrms within the top decile and short the firms within the bottom decile of the extrapolated return measure and holds for five days. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced on a daily basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.