Climate change has been threatening people for decades and is one of the most discussed issues in recent years. As the concerns are rising it could potentially add substantial risks and significantly affect the risks, and returns of investors’ portfolio companies. These additional risks to portfolios may come from companies’ exposure to natural disasters, environmental regulations and policies, and others. Based on a survey, the number of investors that integrate climate risks into their investment processes is rising rapidly. Further, more investors are prone to sustainable investing.
This paper contributes to the existing literature by proposing a new measure to identify mutual funds that are positively or negatively affected by climate change. The novel research shows that funds’ financial performance might be affected by including climate change concerns into investment processes. The price of stocks with high climate-hedging potential may receive a considerably bigger boost during the period when investors’ interest in these equities continues to grow rapidly. Therefore, benefiting funds that lean their investments towards these stocks. On the other hand, when the consumption phase is gone and high climate beta equities are priced at a premium, investors whose investment approaches and strategies hedge against climate change should yield significantly lower expected returns. Specifically, to capture the fund’s capacity to hedge against climate change, the fund-level climate beta is used. Representing the sensitivity of each mutual fund’s returns to innovations in the climate change news index. Further, it can also be used to examine the predictive power for the cross-section of mutual fund returns.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the logic behind the primary variable called climate beta. Funds with the highest climate beta – better hedging against climate change, significantly outperform funds with the lowest climate beta. The authors suggest, that such funds rely their portfolio strategies on stocks with high climate beta, which experience significant increases in value over the chosen period of increasing climate awareness. Additionally, when examining stock-level climate betas, authors discovered that stocks with the highest climate betas earn a higher monthly return than stocks with the lowest climate betas (such a result is already in the Quantpedia’s screener). Therefore, better business fundamentals, as well as increased investor demand for stocks that hedge against climate risk, are more likely to generate such a return spread.
Additionally, using Fama-MacBeth’s (1973) regressions, the authors show that the positive relation between fund-level climate beta and fund returns remains substantial after adjusting for observable fund features and fund styles.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of funds from the CRSP Survivor Bias-Free Mutual Fund Database. Exclude all mutual funds with total net assets of less than $15 million at the end of the current month. The primary variable of interest is the climate beta, capturing the fund’s covariance with innovations in the climate change news index. The climate beta is estimated from the monthly regression of mutual fund excess returns on innovations in the monthly Crimson Hexagon (CH)’s climate change news index over 24 months (see equation 1.). Then sort mutual funds into 5 quintiles based on the fund climate beta estimated from the regression model. The fifth (first) quintile consists of funds with the highest (lowest) climate betas. The trading strategy goes long for the lowest (first) quantile and short for the highest (fifth) quantile. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not offer any insight into this topic and backtesting period does not include any major financial crisis.