An abnormal trading volume in stock usually means that something is happening. New information often arrives, and the stock incorporates this info into its price. And sometimes information is not perfectly spread out in the market but is instead held by more informed traders. Then only an abnormal volume signalizes that some market participants have information not available to the public. Equity markets aren’t efficient, and it always takes a few days until stocks include this information in their price. Therefore, the skilled trader has an opportunity to buy/sell a stock at the market close and exploit the information given by an abnormal volume during the subsequent day. Such a trading strategy using abnormal volume as a buying indicator offers really attractive returns. Academic research tested this trading strategy in Italian stocks; however, there is a high probability that it will also work in other national equity markets.

Fundamental reason
Academic research explains this anomaly by insider trading. It suggests that if the information is not perfectly spread out in the market, but instead held by more informed traders, the observation of trading volumes may enhance the information set. The hypothesis is that large changes in volume, especially when not accompanied by any news disclosure, incorporate a non-public information content and signal future excess returns.

Simple trading strategy
The academic research source uses all stocks listed on the Milan Stock Exchange; however, this trading strategy would probably also work in other national equity markets.

Each trading day, the investor calculates the average volume from the last 66 days and its standard deviation for each stock in the investment universe. The level of trading volume is considered to be “abnormal” if the daily trading volume is more than 2.33 standard deviations away from the mean. Subsequently, among those events, the investor selects only firms with no abnormal volume over the preceding 30 trading days. He/she would buy these firms at the market close of the event day if the stocks finished the day with at least a 1% gain. The investor holds positions in his/her portfolio for one day. Stocks are equally weighted, and the portfolio is rebalanced daily.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only therefore it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).