VIX index measures the implied (expected) volatility from S&P 500 options and is commonly described as an index of fear since it measures expected systematic risk. Although the VIX measures implied volatility and does not have a “spot” market, derivatives such as options or futures are available. The novel research of Gu et al. (2021) examines the information embedded in the VIX options.
The research identified that the VIX options volume predicts the subsequent VIX index. Based on the dataset provided by the CBOE, the authors calculate the put-call trading volume ratio of the VIX options but only for positions initiated by buyers to open new positions. The proposed put-call ratio is an economically and statistically strong predictor of the subsequent VIX changes. Furthermore, the effect is not subsequently reversed and is more significant during high VIX periods. Naturally, the effect could be exploited in a trading strategy that shorts VIX futures when the put-call ratio is abnormally high.

Fundamental reason
Numerous researches have identified that sophisticated and informed investors tend to use options. The novel research is mainly in line with the past literature and states that informed traders use VIX options as trading instruments. Subsequently, the trading volume reflects the information of such traders and predicts the subsequent VIX.
The results are not driven by the impact of economic or financial factors such as a change in the term spread, credit spread, T-bill spread, or lagged S&P 500 return. The predictive power of the put-call ratio remains significant even in the presence of these variables. Additionally, the effect is not subsequently reversed, is more substantial when VIX is high, and the predictive ability holds during both recessions and expansionary periods.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of nearby VIX futures contracts. A Next-to-maturity contract is used when its daily trading volume is higher. Volume data are obtained from CBOE and futures data from Genesis Financial Technologies. As the first step, compute the daily aggregated put-call volume ratio using the trading volume of VIX puts and calls initiated by a buyer to open a new position. The ratio is computed as the put volume divided by the sum of the put and call volume. Secondly, calculate the z-score (subtract mean and divide it by the standard deviation) of the put-call ratio using the expanding timeframe (the first normalization in the paper is performed after 600 days). If the z-score is above 0.75, take a short position in VIX futures. The position is closed the next day.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy shorts volatility, which can be tricky (especially during crises). Although it can be profitable, there is a risk, such as February 5, 2018, when VIX increased from an opening value of 18.44 to 37.32 at the close.

