Technological ability is an important determinant not only of short-term profitability but also of the long-term survival. Firms do not do technological research in isolation; they frequently interact with each other intensively, leading to an innovation process characterized by knowledge spillovers. Firms working on areas of innovation that substantially overlap with each other could be subjects to a similar input or output linkages, an important transmission channel for common price shocks. Similar technologies are related to the spillover effect of each other’s firm innovation activity along technological lines. Moreover, shocks to one firm affect other firms that are closely related in terms of their technological expertise. However, a firm’s technological capabilities are difficult to measure, and literature reports that investors do not seem to be particularly good at valuing these capabilities. Asset pricing implication of investor’s limited processing capability and attention with respect to the technological links is that price movements across linked firms are predictable; focal firm prices will adjust with a lag to shocks experienced by linked firms. Aforementioned implicates that measuring technological linkage (through patents) can be utilized for employing a profitable investing strategy. Research proved that contemporaneous comovement and lead-lag return predictability are stronger in the portfolio with the closest technology-link. As a result of those findings, a robust and profitable strategy was defined – technology momentum. For each focal firm, technology momentum calculates the weighted return of a portfolio of firms that share similar technology as the focal firm. Strong evidence was found that lagged returns of those technology-linked firms have significant return predictability for focal firms. This approach is distinct from the existing literature, studied are the innovations by technologically related peer firms, rather than innovations at the focal firm itself.

Fundamental reason
Investors tend to misvalue innovation or undervalue innovative efficiency and originality. The technology momentum represents a market inefficiency driven by investor’s limited attention, information processing capacity, valuation uncertainty and arbitrage costs – a stronger effect was found for firms that investors are more likely to overlook. The technology momentum effect is robust to controlling for a variety of variables including size, book-to-market, gross profitability, asset growth, R&D intensity, short-term reversal and medium-term price momentum. Furthermore, it cannot be explained by previously documented industry momentum, customer momentum or standalone-conglomerate momentum. Research and backtesting proved that technology-linked firm’s stock returns predict the focal firm’s stock returns. Moreover, no sign of any return reversal was observed in the longer period, indicating that the return predictability of technology momentum cannot be explained by investor’s overreaction.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks of firms in the intersection of the Google patent data, CRSP and COMPUSTAT. Used are common stocks (CRSP share codes 10 and 11) with non-missing market equity and SIC classification code from CRSP and not negative book equity data at the end of the previous fiscal year from COMPUSTAT. Its also required that firms had at least one patent granted in the rolling-window of the past five years. Excluded are financial firms with one-digit SIC codes of six and stocks that are priced below one dollar a share at the beginning of the holding period to reduce the impact of micro-cap stocks.

Technology-linked return (TECHRET) is measured as the average monthly return of technology-linked firms in the technology space weighted by pairwise technology closeness, which is determined on the basis of 427 different technology classes defined by USPTO for all patents. Firstly, the technology closeness (TECH) is defined as the uncentered correlation between all pairs and is counted for every firm i, and month t. TECH is equal to a scalar product of vector Ti for firm i and Tj for firm j (another firm than i) divided by the length of vector Ti multiplied by the length of vector Tj, the vectors consist of 427 elements (n=1,2,…,421) and represent firms technology activity, where an nth member of the vector is the average share of the number of patents in USPTO technology class n out of the firm’s total number of patents over the rolling past five years. Technology closeness ranges between zero and one, depending on the degree of overlap in technology space and no surprise it is symmetric. By its construction, the TECH essentially also acts as a weight in calculating the average stock return of technology-linked firms and is biased toward firms which are more technologically close to the focal firm. Secondly, TECHRET for firm i and month t is defined as a sum for every i different from j of TECHij multiplied by RETj (past month return of technology-linked firm j) divided by the sum of TECHij for every i different from j. Both equations can be found on page 19.

At the beginning of each month, sort all firms into deciles based on the return of their technology-linked portfolios in the previous month. Long the top decile and short the bottom decile. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.