Market anomalies provide investors with great opportunities to earn abnormal returns. However, several studies have documented that the stock market anomalies tend to weaken or even disappear after being highlighted in academic journals. This suggests that it is necessary for an investor to search for fresh ideas and unexploited market anomalies.
One of the new, unique approaches in investigating the stock market is presented in the research from Hao Jiang et al. (2020). In contrast to studies, that emphasize the anticipation of important economic news as a source of risk which drives stock prices, the presented research is focused on the return patterns that follow the publication of news stories. The researchers used an approach, where they examine the difference in initial stock returns among firms with news stories, which is less likely to reflect risk premiums for information uncertainty. In order to capture the initial stock price responses to a news release, the authors decompose a trading day from market open to close into 15-minute intervals. If a new story about a particular stock is published, the return of respective 15-minute interval during which the news was published is considered as “news return“. At the end of the day, the „news returns“ for particular stocks are aggregated into daily news return. Based on these returns, the investment universe is then sorted into deciles at the end of the trading day. The proposed trading strategy then goes long on the top decile of stocks with highest daily news returns and short on decile bottom decile with the holding period of five trading days. Following this strategy, the investor would earn an annual return of 20,98% from 03/2000 to 10/2012.
It is important to note that the presented numbers belong to the strategy that uses the value-weighted principle and applies the 5$ filter for the stock price to eliminate the influence of small-cap firms. The study also presents results for strategies where the filter is not applied. Without applying the filter, the proits are even greater, but the investor faces a bigger liquidity risk.

Fundamental reason
The researchers provide supporting evidence for two hypotheses that explain this anomaly. The first is the inattention hypothesis which documents, that investors have limited cognitive ability, which prevents them from immediately processing every bit of news to fully understand its implication for firm value. The second hypothesis considers the slow adjustments of market expectations following firm news. For instance, it was found, that that financial analysts tend to revise their earnings forecasts in a three-day window after receiving news reports in the direction of the news sentiment.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of firms listed on NYSE, NASDAQ and AMEX. On a particular day, the universe is filtered at the close of the trading day to the stocks, whose price is higher than $5 and have had at least one news story covered by the Dow Jones News Wire during the day. The firm news data are obtained from the RavenPack news database, which provides a comprehensive sample of firm-specific news stories from the Dow Jones News Wire. Only the acquisitions-mergers, analyst-ratings, assets, bankruptcy, credit, credit-ratings, dividends, earnings, equity-actions, labor-issues, product-services, and revenues stories with RavenPack relevance score of 100 are taken into consideration. Also, the 100 event novelty score of the news story is required. The trading day is decomposed from market open to close into 15-minute intervals. If a new story about a particular stock is published, the return of respective 15-minute interval during which the news was published is considered as “news return“. If the news appears during non-trading hours, the return of the first 15-minute interval of the next trading day is considered as “news return“. At the end of the trading day, the “news returns“ for particular stocks are aggregated into “daily news return“. Based on these daily returns, the investment universe is then sorted into deciles at the end of the trading day. The investor goes long on the top decile of stocks with the highest “daily news returns“ and short on bottom decile at the end of the trading day. The portfolio is value-weighted and held for five trading days.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide information on whether the strategy can be used as a hedge to equities