The reversal effect, a well-known phenomenon in financial markets, represents an inclination of high return assets to decline and low return assets to increase in the future. Many studies have examined its applications, whereas this paper extends research on a very rarely explored topic – an afternoon reversal. The author (Xu) divided the trading hours into three intervals – morning (9:30 a.m. – 11:30 a.m.), midday (11:30 a.m. – 2:00 p.m.), and afternoon (2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.). Subsequently, he looked at both morning and afternoon returns, finding that morning return positively predicts future months’ returns. On the other hand, the afternoon return is the leading cause of daily and monthly reversal. Naturally, such results can be the basis of the trading strategy. The simple strategy tells us to sort stocks into deciles based on monthly cumulative afternoon return, go long the bottom decile and go short the top decile, holding this position for one month.

Fundamental reason
Past research has looked at many reasons why reversal might work. One of the main reasons for this anomaly is the investor’s overreaction and subsequent correction after a short time. Nagel (2012) claims that returns of short-term reversal strategies in equity markets can be interpreted as a proxy for the returns from liquidity provision. According to the author (Xo), the afternoon hours are ideal for such liquidity trading because of low bid-ask spreads and the high market volume. However, both morning and afternoon hours have a high market volume. But on the other hand, afternoon hours have a significantly lower trading cost and information asymmetry.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all AMEX, NYSE, and NASDAQ stocks with share codes 10 and 11. Closed-end funds, REITs, ADRs, foreign stocks, and stocks with prices below 5$ are excluded. The data come from CRSP. At the end of each month t, for every stock, calculate monthly cumulative afternoon returns – accumulate every tradings day’s 2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. return in month t. Subsequently, based on this return, sort stocks into deciles. Long the bottom decile (stocks with lowest monthly cumulative afternoon returns) and short the top decile (stocks with highest monthly cumulative afternoon returns). The strategy is equal-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -