The anchoring effect is the tendency of individuals to base their decisions on salient yet irrelevant factors. In investment decision-making, investors tend to anchor to past high and low stock prices instead of focusing on what really matters, i.e., the ratio of stock price relative to its intrinsic value. Several academic studies discuss this behavioral phenomenon and its implications for stock returns. A research paper by Choy and Wei (2022) complements the literature on behavioral biases and examines how option trading activities and option returns react to the stock price relative to its 52-week extremes. Its main takeaways can be summarized as follows. First, options trading for both calls and puts decreases as the stock approaches its 52-week high or low, indicating sluggish incorporation of new information into option prices. Second, the buy-sell imbalance for calls decreases and for puts increases as the stock price approaches its 52-week high, and the opposite occurs as the stock price closes to its 52-week low. Most importantly, subsequent delta-hedged option returns for both calls and puts are higher as the stock price approaches its 52-week extreme, suggesting that the anchoring effect can be exploited by a trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
Driessen, Lin, and Van Hemert (2012) found that the implied volatility in both call and put options decreases when the stock price approaches the 52-week extremes, which indicates anchoring-induced sluggish incorporation of news into stock prices. Consequently, this downward-biased volatility forecast leads to the undervaluation of both calls and puts when the stock price is at its 52-week high and low. However, the demand-pressure theory of Garleanu, Pedersen, and Poteshman (2009) implies mispricing of calls and puts in the opposite direction. More specifically, calls (puts) become undervalued and puts (calls) overvalued when the stock price approaches its 52-week high (low). The demand-pressure effect and the volatility effect reinforce each other for calls (puts) when the stock price approaches its 52-week high (low), but they offset each other for calls (puts) when the stock price approaches its 52-week low (high). Translating prices into returns, when the stock price approaches its 52-week high (low), the subsequent delta-hedged returns are unambiguously higher for calls (puts).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks from the CRSP database and their underlying options contracts. First, apply the following screening procedure to the options universe and retain only those which meet the following criteria: trading volume is non-zero, maturity is between 30 and 60 days (i.e., only options maturing in the month following the next), moneyness (defined as the exercise price over the stock price) is in the range of (0.8, 1.2), the bid quote and bid-ask spread are positive, and the percentage bid-ask spread (i.e., bid-ask spread divided by the midpoint) is less than 100%. Second, on the last trading day of each month, calculate the price-to-high (PTH) ratio for each stock, defined as the stock price divided by its 52-week high. Third, sort the stocks into quintiles based on their PTH ratio, where the highest quintile consists of the highest PTH stocks, and the lowest quintile consists of the lowest PTH stocks. Fourth, for each stock in the highest quintile, buy one call option and delta-hedge in the next month with daily rebalancing. Conversely, for each stock in the lowest quintile, sell one call option and delta-hedge in the next month with daily rebalancing. Invest/borrow the net balance at the risk-free rate. Positions are value-weighted based on the dollar value of open interest and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - We would not suggest using option activities as a hedge against well-diversified portfolio in times of significant turbulences and negative financial conditions.