Firms’ ﬁnancial reports include various more or less important information about the firms’ earnings over a period of time. Certain components of earnings declared by ﬁrms’ in their publications are more persistent over time because they stem from the core operations of the ﬁrm. In contrast, others reﬂect temporary shocks, that are unlikely to be reached again. Understanding the difference between these types of items is crucial for interpreting and projecting ﬁrms’ future performance. The prior research shows, that modified earnings that do not include non-core items tend to be more accurate in explaining the firms’ stock price movements.

The research from Ethan Rouen et al. (2020) contributes to the literature by examining the extent to which market participators understand the relationship between current temporary earnings and future performance of a company. More importantly, the researchers also present a unique trading strategy based on this effect. The presented strategy stems from a precondition that Core earnings of a company derive from reported net income and total adjustments.

Total adjustments represent net expenses that are identiﬁed as separately disclosed line items in the income statement or as portions of an aggregate line item that are separately disclosed only in footnotes or the MD&A. The dataset of total adjustments is provided by New Constructs, a company, which uses a combination of analysts and machine learning to gather and classify quantitative disclosures listed in the 10-Ks of publicly listed ﬁrms in the Russell 3000. NC distinguishes eight main categories of ﬁrms’ non-core revenues and expenses: Net Acquisition Expenses, Net Currency Expenses, Net Discontinued Ops Expenses, Net Legal Expenses, Net Pension Adjustments, Net Restructuring Expenses, Net Company Deﬁned Other Expenses, and Net Other Expenses.
These total adjustments are the basis of the proposed trading strategy. Based on NC´s data of total adjustments, the investor goes long on the decile of firms that have the greatest income-increasing adjustments and short on the bottom decile (firms in lowest decile have the highest dollar value of income-decreasing adjustments). Using this strategy, a value-weighted portfolio would bring an average annual return of 7.51% from 1998 to 2017.

Fundamental reason
The findings show that the reason behind this anomaly could be found in investors ignorance in taking the implications of transitory earnings into account. Moreover, practitioners rely too much on analysts’ forecasts.

Further, it was found, that the extent of total non-operating net expenses contained in GAAP earnings-per-share is associated with positive and signiﬁcant reviews in analysts’ earnings-per-share forecasts in the 12 months following a ﬁrm’s 10-K ﬁling. Thanks to these revisions, the investors slowly acknowledge the findings of the company’s core earnings over the year and the stock prices are expected to adjust accordingly.

Therefore, the size of total transitory net expenses contained in GAAP earnings-per-share predicts firms’ stock returns to a certain extent in the 12 months after filing their 10-K report.
Lastly, further findings show that the number of income-statement-related line items or quantitative disclosures that are considered as non-core and are included in total adjustments has grown by 34% over the last 20 years. Therefore, the results of the presented strategy could become more robust in the future.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Russell 3000 companies. Based on total adjustments data obtained from New constructs (or calculated by the methodology used in source paper), the investor goes long on the top decile composed of firms with the greatest income-increasing adjustments compared to the previous year. On the other hand, the investor goes short on the bottom decile of firms with the highest dollar value of income-decreasing adjustments compared to the previous year. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced yearly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.