Tang, Wu, and Jiang (November 2022) propose a measure to capture investor sentiment to an exaggerated, biased belief related to stocks based on the divergence of the stock’s market beta from its industry peers, and define it as the firm-level investor sentiment (FIS). This measure seems to exhibit a mean-reverting pattern and ranges more widely among speculative stocks, coinciding with the existing properties of investor sentiment. The empirical results show a statistically and economically negative relationship between firm-level sentiment and stock future return. The negative sentiment-return relation comes mainly from the underperformance of firms with the highest investor sentiment. Shortly summarised: stocks with high FIS generate lower future returns than those with lower FIS.

Fundamental reason
The negative return relationship of FIS is unaffected by the generic impact of market-level investor sentiment indices, suggesting that FIS contains unique information different from market sentiment. The negative return predictability is driven primarily by investors’ speculative demand. The stocks traded by optimistic investors are likely to experience highly speculative buying. With firms’ true fundamental information released, the speculative buying of high-sentiment stocks tends to decline in the following periods, resulting in a price reversal. They further find that the negative predictive ability of investor sentiment is stronger among stocks with a high degree of participation of noise traders and during periods of recession. Traders can cause stock overpricing that subsequently reverses.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe includes all common stocks listed on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ with a price above $5 a share at portfolio formation. Industry classification and return data are required to estimate the industry market beta. Following Asness et al. (2014), investor classifies firms into different industries according to the Fama-French 49-industry classification. The industry classification and equal-weighted return data are obtained from Kenneth French’s data library. Betas are calculated from regression models in eqs. 1 and 2.

FIS is constructed as a multiplication of the beta change with the beta divergence (eq. 5). Beta change is the difference between the (short-term) beta of stock s in month t and the (short-term) beta of stock s in month t-1 divided by the (long-term) beta of stock s in month t-1 (eq. 4). Beta divergence is the difference between (short-term) beta of stock s in month t and the (long-term) beta of industry i in month t−1 divided by that (long-term) beta of industry i in month t−1 (eq. 3).

At the end of each month, stocks are sorted into decile portfolios based on their FIS values, constructed using the procedure explained above (described in Section 2 of paper). Portfolio Low (High) contains the stocks with the lowest (highest) FIS. We execute a long-short trading strategy that sells (goes short) portfolio High and buys (goes long) portfolio Low. All portfolios are value-weighted and rebalanced at the end of the month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - In some aspects it might provide hedging.