According to the authors, a market-timing investment strategy developed from real-time measures based on the textual analysis of newspaper media which have forecasting ability to call recessions with the confluence of existing predictors that rely on other commonly used forecasting variables can generate a statistically significant, positive alpha. The result of their research, the raw media recession index (raw MRI), can be concluded to be a useful addition to an arsenal of portfolio managers and hedge funds. This one can be regarded as a leading indicator, giving it special prediction power. A simple trading strategy utilizing the findings from the paper can foresee the coming recession in advance and provides a signal to shift from equities to safe bonds.

Fundamental reason
Building on foundations of computational linguistics (or natural language processing [NLP]) techniques and applying previous research from ’00s, the goal is to predict the probability of entering a recession a few months after the media indicators rise above a certain value. The key idea is simple: authors measure the frequency with which the word “recession” appears in financial and economic specialist newspapers (like FT and WSJ). Scientists found strong evidence that MRIs predict NBER recessions 6 months ahead of time, and they perform well relative to the other variables, traditionally taken as being able to provide a forecast of the recession better. Due to the difficult nature of the task, a non-linear model is deployed to capture the potential non-linearities that arise from rapid changes in economic activity and asset prices. Paper was also undergoing a battery of robustness checks on their media recession indicators.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 2 US ETFs: SPY and BIL. We construct a market-timing strategy that switches from stocks to cash based on the raw MRI recession signal for the 50% threshold. Indicator variable MRI Raw_t is computed as in eq. (1), basically as the sum of the occurrences of word recession in mentioned news outlets; which is added to the regression formula as on eq. (3) for calculation for the probability of a recession on eq. (9) and (10). The dependent variable of said regression is NBER’s recession probability, while independent variables are estimated coefficients from MRI Raw_t. The market timing strategy involves holding the stock market index when the probability of recession in the next 6 months is less than 50% and 3-month U.S. treasury bills when it is greater than 50%. The portfolio is rebalanced dynamically, based on signal and binary: either fully invested in one or the other asset.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Strategy itself is a hedge against stock bear markets, allocating a portfolio to risk-free assets.