Post-earnings announcement drift (PEAD) is the tendency for a stock’s cumulative abnormal returns to drift for several weeks (even several months) following the positive earnings announcement. Time spent by assessing the earnings documents depends on their complexity, and it also affects the drift in stock price, which occur after publishing these documents. The more complex the company is, the harder it is for investors to evaluate information from the earnings announcement. Therefore, we are focusing on the conglomerates because of their wide business models making companies more difficult to understand. This strategy is based on a research paper written by Cohen and Lou (2012), who looked at conglomerates in the way how the stock price is reacting to industry-wide shocks with comparison to single-segment firms. They found that conglomerates take longer to absorb these shocks, which makes post-earnings announcement drift strategy among them more visible, profitable, and easier to implement.

Fundamental reason
Post earnings announcement drift (PEAD) has a more significant effect on conglomerates because of the complexity of their earnings documents, which are difficult to evaluate. The increase of this complexity way increases PEAD. Sigle-segment companies are, on the other hand, easy to understand, so the stock price is quickly reacting, and therefore, their PEAD is much weaker. This hypothesis is also supported by additional characteristics, which conglomerates have. They are covered by fewer analysts who make more significant forecast errors because of their lack of industry expertise. Conglomerates have also relatively low short interest, and institutional ownership and also attract less aggregate trading activity. All these factors result in slower price discovery and, therefore, stronger PEAD. Authors statistically proved that cumulative abnormal results gained in drift significantly interact with an earnings surprise by regression.

The conglomerate is a company with market capitalization at least 5 mld. USD and which operates in two or more different industries (different two-digit SIC codes).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of conglomerates traded on NYSE (exclude firms with a market cap in lowest quintile). Buy them two days after they show earnings surprise and hold for another 58 trading days. The conglomerate is a company with market capitalization at least 5 mld. USD and which operates in two or more different industries (different two-digit SIC codes). The portfolio is rebalanced on a daily basis (as earnings announcements are scheduled nearly every day).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only; therefore, it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as most of the strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very high).