Social networks have become an essential part of many peoples lives around the world. We follow the news feed on Facebook and Twitter, share our memories on Instagram or chat with friends on Whatsapp. Among these popular free time and unformal social networks, also a few more serious has emerged, with one of them being the LinkedIn. LinkedIn represents business like platform, where users publicly share information about their education, work experience and their current job. The exact figures might not be available, but there are more than 160 million past and present U.S. users on LinkedIn as of October 2019, while the current U.S. labour force is estimated at 164 million workers. With the high fluctuation of rank-to-file employees in the modern era, the publicly free data from this platform are becoming a valuable asset, that brings new opportunities.

Analyzing these data from the individual LinkedIn profiles of Rusell 1000 companies employees, the research from Ashiwini Agrawal et al. (2020) tries to evaluate, whether the rank-to-file labour flows can be applied as a variable to predict abnormal stock returns. The findings show that rank-and-file employees’ entry and exit decisions convey valuable insight into their employers’ future stock performance. According to the researchers, these flows reflect information observed by workers, that is not incorporated into stock prices by investors. Building a portfolio reflecting these flows with going long and short on quintiles of companies that have gained or lost the most on the number of employees brings an annual return of 5,41% from 2010 to 2016.

Further findings show that equity analysts do not incorporate the information from labour flows into earnings expectations. It was shown, that analysts overestimate (underestimate) the earnings of firms that experience high (low) net labour outflows, and the stock prices decrease significantly in response to negative earnings surprises. Additionally, the study contributes that the link between labour flows and stock returns is significantly stronger among firms, that are less transparent to investors. Lastly, the results show that the relationship is stronger between gross labour outflows and negative abnormal returns, rather than between inflows and positive abnormal returns.

Fundamental reason
Various possible explanations have been reviewed. However, neither of them could be considered as eligible to explain this anomaly. It was shown, that the results are not subject to reversal over longer-time horizons, they do not reflect employment adjustment costs caused by worker flows and neither they are subject of restricted access to labour flows data.

As an explanation could be considered, that workers try to observe possible signals of the firm’s future prospects and they update their wage expectations at the firm according to them. These signals may vary from production costs to information about the CEO’s productivity. In response to negative (positive) signals, workers become more likely to exit (join) the firm. As was outlined before, the abnormal returns could also be driven by investors inattention to this relationship, while the access to data is not an issue. It is possible that investors believe that the information contained in labour flows is sufficiently included in other data and indicators, which are used to value securities.

The study also surveyed the actual LinkedIn users and shows empirical evidence, that workers are making entry and exit decisions in accordance with employers’ future prospects. What is more, the interviewed claimed, that future prospects were more important to their decisions than factors such as family considerations.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks, which are included in the Russell 1000 index. Each month, the sample strategy requires downloading a data of random one million LinkedIn users, that are or have been employed at a publicly-traded company from the investment universe. Firms are then sorted according to the net labour flow, which is defined as the ratio of the difference between the total number of employees who join a firm minus the total number of employees who exit the firm (during the month), divided by the total number of employees at the firm at the beginning of the month. The investor then goes long on the quintile of firms with the biggest employment growth and short on the lowest quintile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.
