China has political and economic environments quite different from those in the US and other developed economies. Specifically, individual investors contribute about 80% of the total trading volume. By evaluating the function of the Chinese stock market in terms of the size of liquidity premium and detecting a monotonical growth in premium in the Chinese market, this research sheds new light on the potential of the Chinese stock market as a capital allocation tool.
Novel research shows that the stock market liquidity in determining the expected returns for both firm-level and market-level in China stock market. The Fama-MacBeth (1973) results imply that predicted returns are strongly correlated with stock illiquidity, regardless of which liquidity indicators are used. The authors then investigate the illiquidity premium effect using a wide range of stock illiquidity measures, which captures the various liquidity dimensions, such as depth, spread, and trading activities. The first illiquidity measure is an inverse turnover (INVTO), defined as a proxy for trading frequency. Although there are also other metrics presented in the paper, this screener´s addition is related to the inverse turnover since it is simple to construct, but most importantly, it is a robust stock predictor.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the uniqueness of the Chinese market. In the Chinese market the strongest and most critical predictable indicator is liquidity. Furhter, Carpenter et al. (2021) proved in their research that China’s cost of equity capital is significantly higher than in the US market. As a result, the Chinese market is particularly appealing to liquid-based methods. To be more specific, liquidity is created by three key elements of a trading mechanism as well as institutional arrangements that are substantially distinct from those seen in other markets. To begin with, all trading in the domestic market (Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges) is done through a call auction or a continuous auction. If there are no counterparties in the trading process, this characteristic increases the liquidity risk. Second, even though the number of institutional investors is rapidly increasing every year, individual investors still dominate the Chinese stock market, accounting for 99.7% of all stock accounts. Behavioral biases are very common among retail investors, who engage in speculative trading and are motivated by short-term goals, resulting in high trade turnover and volatility. Finally, short selling in China is not very expanded and it accounts for less than 1% of overall trading activity. Short selling and margin trading only increased from less than 13 billion RMB in 2010 to 1.02 trillion RMB by the end of 2019. The imbalance would affect trade volume and spread by decreasing market efficiency and increasing market friction.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese stocks with common shares from the WIND database, listed in the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange.
To begin, calculate monthly inverse turnover (INVTO) by inverting the turnover ratio computed by dividing the number of traded shares in a given month by the total number of shares. Second, each month, construct quintile portfolios by sorting equities according to INVTO, with the first quantile containing the lowest INVTO and quintile five containing the greatest. Long the top quintile (stocks with the highest INVTO) and short the bottom quintile (stocks with the lowest INVTO). The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Although the paper does not explicitly examine the hedging properties of the strategy, it buys the most illiquid stocks, which could be problematic during crises. Especially during crises, there is a flight to safety/quality, so we expect that the illiquid stocks would perform poorly (and they might be even impossible to trade at all during these periods).