Momentum is a widely recognized investment strategy in the financial markets that is an excellent example of how quantitative approaches might work. Although it originated as a simple strategy in the equity market, the anomaly received enormous interest from academics and practitioners. As a result, the momentum was identified in other markets or even factors, and the original idea is continuously improving. Cirulli et al. (2022) add to the literature with another captivating momentum modification. The authors aim to construct a better-diversified momentum.
Diversification is another crucial concept in investing that can be theoretically “perfect” but is significantly more difficult in practice. Unstable estimation and changing market conditions often make the theoretical results impossible to implement in practice. One of the possible ways how to achieve a better and practically implementable diversification is to employ a dimension reduction – for example, using clustering as it is used in this research. One can construct the similarity/distance based on the past prices (asset returns) without a need to estimate (the often unstable) covariance/correlation matrix. As a result, we can identify similar/dissimilar assets and diversify our investments.
Additionally, as previously indicated, the authors employ and momentum overlay. In each cluster, the authors pick the stocks based on both the cross-sectional and time-series momentum. Therefore, the resulting strategy is both diversified and optimized to achieve a better performance thanks to the return-enhancing properties of the momentum. Furthermore, by employing the Sharpe ratio instead of the pure performance, the authors also address a common momentum problem – the momentum crashes. Past research has identified that the risk-adjusted momentum is less prone to crashes.
To sum it up, the research paper is an interesting addition to the literature with important insights into the possibility of the implementation thanks to the transaction costs and alleviation of the survivorship bias in the sample dataset.

Fundamental reason
The paper essentially combines two ideas that both have sound logic. Firstly, momentum was repeatedly shown to be a strategy that delivers positive performance (outperformance), and there is no doubt that it is a working strategy. However, there are specific problems with momentum – concentration, crashes, and riskiness. While the usage of the risk-adjusted momentum (Sharpe ratio) was shown to reduce the risk, the authors identified another way to reduce the risk and concentration – to diversify better. Therefore, the authors suggest a hierarchical clustering that is not prone to estimation problems as other methods and can successfully identify similar and dissimilar assets.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of MSCI ACWI stocks. The first step is to perform the clustering. The clusters are found by agglomerative (bottom-up) hierarchical clustering with a fixed number of clusters of 150 (authors also examine other options in the appendix) using the past five years of weekly returns. The distance between two objects is defined as the square root of one-half times one minus the correlation between two objects (the first eq. on page 4), and the clusters are based on the average linkage. As the next step, construct the momentum indicator for each stock as the Sharpe ratio, which is computed as the average weekly return using the past year´s data divided by the standard deviation based on weekly returns using the past five years of data. In each cluster, identify the stock with the highest momentum (cross-sectional approach). Out of these stocks, filter out those with negative momentum (additional time-series approach) and invest in the rest of the stocks. The strategy is rebalanced monthly and equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Since correlations generally increase in a crisis period, increased diversification is a favorable feature of the HM strategy.

The HM strategy tends to outperform the rest of the strategies, especially after the global financial crisis. This outperformance is driven by both dimensionality reduction and diversification via hierarchical clustering (i.e., stabilizing the portfolio across different economic regimes) and momentum-based stock selection (i.e., capturing the momentum premium).