Are equity analysts useful, or are they simply wasting their (and investor’s) time? Academic research has long been skeptical of whether security analysts can forecast stock returns. On the other hand, banks, asset management, and brokerage houses devote extensive resources to predict firms’ expected earnings. Current academic research shows that there is added value in earnings forecasts. A trading strategy of buying stocks with strong upward revisions in analysts’ earnings forecasts and selling short stocks with strong downward revisions yields substantial abnormal returns. This strategy could even be enhanced if it is implemented only on a portfolio of firms with low dispersion in consensus forecasts. The strategy could be implemented as a long-short version (providing a high diversifying effect) or a long-only version (easier to implement).

Fundamental reason
Behavioral explanations are proposed to explain the stock’s predictability. The academic explanation says that people do not consider new sample data sufficiently and are, in this sense, too conservative. The theory implies that investors display conservatism and under-react to information that has a high weight when adjusting their beliefs. A revision in consensus forecasts with low dispersion, or other words, higher weight, is expected to result on average in a stronger impact on stock prices.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all German firms with a minimum coverage of three analysts. Earnings forecasts for the next fiscal year are obtained on the first trading day each month. Dispersion is the coefficient of variation of all earnings estimates, measured as the standard deviation of all estimates that make up the consensus as a percentage of the absolute value of the mean value of all estimates for the company. Revision ratios are computed as the average monthly change in the expected earnings per share as a percentage of the absolute value of the latest consensus forecasts.

Stocks are ranked in descending order into five equally weighted portfolios on the basis of their earnings revision ratios. Three further sub-portfolios are formed based on the dispersion in the consensus forecasts within each earnings revision portfolio. The investor goes long on stocks with the highest upward earnings revisions and the lowest dispersion and goes short on stocks with the greatest downward earnings revisions and the lowest dispersion. The portfolio is equally weighted and is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is yet needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.