Both sell-side and buy-side analysts are typically organized along industrial, rather than geographic, lines. Therefore, they are trained to incorporate news from one company into the whole industry quickly. An academic paper by Parsons, Sabbatucci and Titman has come with a theory, that this analysts’ training causes inefficiency in the performance of a stock of companies which are headquartered in the same location but are from different industries (as those companies are not followed by the same analyst, and therefore it takes longer to incorporate all news into prices). The investor can capitalize on this anomaly by ranking each firm not by its own lagged return (as he would in a simple momentum strategy), but by the average lagged return of firms headquartered in the same region, but operating in different sectors.

Fundamental reason
The academic paper states that these lead-lag effects are generated by slow information diffusion. The key assumption is that when two firms are covered by a common analyst, common sources of information are incorporated quickly into prices, compared to two firms with non-overlapping analysts.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed at NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. Investor assigns to each firm a location variable, based on the zip code (ZIP) corresponding to its headquarter location. Headquarter locations are grouped by economic areas (EA), as de ned by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. EAs are intended to capture local nodes of economic activity, and typically involve a main metropolitan area, along with smaller surrounding regions from which workers may commute. Examples of EAs include San Jose-San Francisco-Oakland (CA), Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Gainesville, (GA-AL) and Houston-Baytown-Huntsville (TX). Twenty such areas are defined in the United States. Every month, investor ranks each firm not by its own lagged return (as he would in a simple momentum strategy), but by the average lagged return of firms headquartered in the same region, but operating in different sectors. Companies are sorted into quintiles and investor then goes long companies from the highest performing quintile and goes short companies from the lowest-performing quintile. The portfolio is equally weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.