The paper compares the out-of-sample predictive power of various machine learning models for a broad sample of 32 emerging market countries and a 20-year out-of-sample period. Scientists investigated predictions from a wide range of ML models, from simpler, such as a linear OLS (ordinary least squares) regression, through moderate as various nets, trees, and forests, to advanced ones, from which we base our selected strategy on: an ensemble (ENS) of non-linear machine learning models (RF, GBRT, and NN_1−5). Finally, they conclude that return forecasts based on machine learning models lead to economically and statistically superior (outperformance) out-of-sample long-short returns compared to traditional linear models.

Fundamental reason
ML (machine learning) is experiencing a boom in quantitative finance fields in recent time, mostly due to increasing accessibility and lower usage costs. Numerous papers and research have covered the topic over the last five years. It is being documented that the high returns of the machine learning strategies in emerging do not primarily stem from higher-risk months and do not revert quickly, suggesting that an underreaction explanation is more likely than a risk-based explanation. The possible fundamental explanations of the superiority of ML models over linear ones include better utilization of data from lower-risk months performance, first adaptation advantage in EMs (market integration), better consideration of ML for more extended holding periods, and better limits-to-arbitrage constraints adjustments.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of EM equities limiting our investment universe to big stocks only. Buy/hold long-only strategy is using ML algorithm that computes return prediction (eq. (15)) from 36 firm-level characteristics (available on Refintiv platforms; the willing reader can look them up in Appendix B – Characteristics definition) using the ENS model accounting for transaction costs (eq. (14)).

ENS comprises the (results of) average combination of the more advanced machine learning methods that allow for non-linearities and interactions, i.e., the two tree-based models (GBRT, RF), and the ensemble comprising the five different neural networks (NN_1−5). In GBTR, the number of trees in the forest T: [50, 52, …, 500] and each is growing to maximum depth D: [1, 2, …, 8], separation is based on minimizing MSE (mean squared error), learning rate LR: [0.01, 0.02, …, 0.1] bases numbers of the share of the bootstrapped samples B. For RF, T: [100, 102, …, 600], max. depth D is the same, the trees additionally use random subsets R: [0.01, 0.02, …, 1] of characteristics to grow the branches. These hyperparameters are optimized through the validation step. Feed-forward neural networks have one input and output layer and 1, 2, …, 4 hidden layers. The first hidden layer contains 32 nodes, and each additional hidden layer divides the number of nodes by two compared to the previous layer, following the geometric pyramid rule. Hyperparametered Batch Size: 10000 and nr. of Epochs: 100.

Every month final portfolio consists of the stocks that currently belong to the top 10% (top decile) plus the stocks selected in previous months that have not deteriorated beyond the top 30% (stocks which have been in top decile last month, and not present in top 30% this current are sold). We can hedge our portfolio by going short the broad emerging market stock index. Strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Authors note that besides a sharp drawdown in 2009, all approaches have no other notable downturns. The drawdown in 2009 probably stems from the models’ exposure to the momentum that exhibited a momentum crash at that time (Daniel and Moskowitz, 2016; Hanauer and Windmüller, 2023). The recent global shock due to the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020 did not lead to a significant portfolio-level downturn.