The Euro-Area sovereign bond market represents one of the largest markets of its kind. The previously performed research on this market has shown that a new supply of government securities temporary affects secondary market prices. It was shown that the bond yield tends to rise during days before the auction and then fall in the days following the auction, creating an inverted V-shaped pattern of the yield.
These findings have also been revised in the study by Mario Bellia (2018) in the case of Italian and German sovereign bond markets, which account for roughly half of the total European sovereign debt outstanding. Both these markets are specified by the presence of primary market dealers (mostly investment banks), who provide liquidity in the secondary market, and are also required to participate to the primary auctions submitting meaningful bids actively.
In contrast to the previous researches, this research narrows the time window and focuses on a bond yield’s behaviour in the space of hours before and after the auction. As it was shown, by using intraday data, it is possible to better understand the price dynamics and market participants’ behaviour before the auction. The intraday data investigation provides evidence of an intraday pronounced inverted V-Shape on the yield difference, which goes up with a maximum at the auction time, and subsequently recovers more than two hours after the auction. While the increase in the interest rates in the last minutes before the auction is much steeper than the subsequent decrease after the auction, a significantly higher return is present in the minutes after the auction. On the sample of 109 auctions of 10Y German and Italian bonds from 07/2011 to 12/2016, the cumulative return during the 30 minutes after the auction has been on average higher by 10,13 basis points than the cumulative return during the 30 minutes before the auction.

Fundamental reason
The explanation behind this intraday anomaly can be found in the high risk-aversion of the market makers. The uncertainty around the auction pushes market-makers to reduce the amount quoted bonds. The restricted supply causes a rise in the yields. The dealers start quoting the bonds again from ten to twenty minutes after the auction, resulting in higher supply and decrease in yield.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 10Y German and Italian bonds. On the days of subsequent issues of the same on-the-run bonds, go long on the bond right after the auction and hold the position for 30 minutes. Therefore, the strategy has an intraday rebalancing period.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -
