FX market has been widely examined by researchers, but they have predominantly concentrated on over-the-counter (OTC) contracts, with not much attention on futures contracts. It is understandable since OTC market is much larger than the futures market and OTC data allow identification of certain trader’s order flows. However, it is surprising that there is little research on FX futures because futures have unique features which can attract informed investors. They allow informed investors to hide their private information, they are transparent, integrated and standardized. Finally, compared to OTC contracts futures do not require credit valuation adjustments. The author tried to study FX futures returns around U.S. payroll announcements, where payroll announcements are considered to be most important information in FX trading.
Novel research shows that there is an evidence of informed trading in the futures market and identifies different roles of speculators and hedgers. The key finding of the study is that speculators have adjusted their FX futures portfolio in the correct direction ahead of payroll announcements exposures and thus have earned positive returns around real-time payrolls announcements. On the other hand, hedgers have been exposed to FX futures in the wrong direction and therefore have earned negative gains. Thus, speculators act as informed traders whereas hedgers are liquidity providers. The author introduced payroll news timing strategy which examines investors’ FX exposures and evaluates its economic value against different risky reference assets (stocks, bonds, commodities). The key idea of this strategy is to construct FX target portfolio by exactly mimicking informed investors’ FX exposures and engage in around payroll announcements.
Fundamental reason
The main reason for functionality of the strategy is the logic behind investors’ FX portfolio exposures which contain unique information about the subsequent payroll announcements. This strategy persists because of the long-lived information in FX exposures which could be explained by timing and stealth-based motives. First, speculators might be patient at executing their traders or wait for great noise trading activity or market liquidity. Second, they might have access to private information that are not available to other traders. The author suggests that speculators are informed traders and therefore by mimicking their FX portfolio exposures could generate economic gains for investors. The FX portfolio exposures are defined as net position of the long and short open interest in U.S. dollars and rescaled by its portfolio weights so that sum up to unity over different futures.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of several FX futures: euro (Deutsche mark before euro), British pound, Swiss franc, Japanese yen, Canadian dollar, Australian dollar, and New Zealand dollar. Data used for this strategy are investors’ FX exposures obtained from CFTC’S Commitments of Traders (COT) reports, bid-ask spreads for futures, and OTC market extracted from Refinitiv Tick History and Eikon. Futures margins data are collected from Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). As the first step, evaluate the long and short open interest in U.S. dollars for each currency futures for the speculator investor type. Nextly, define the daily net open interest as the open long minus the short interest. FX exposure of speculators is calculated for each currency as the net open interest of the given currency divided by the sum of absolute values of net open interest (sum for all currencies). The portfolio weights are equal to the FX exposures. On the day of the payroll announcements, mimick FX exposure of speculators by investing in currency futures with 10-days lagged portfolio weights. The positions are opened five minutes before the payroll announcements and are closed one hour after release.
The author define the FX target portfolio such that it is comprised of (100-𝛼)% risky assets and 𝛼 % cash holdings (cash holdings are between 5% and 20%). The strategy requires a certain amount of cash available due to the margin requirement of futures contracts. The rest is invested in one of the risky assets: S&P 500 total return index, Bank of America U.S. corporate bond total return index, JP Morgan aggregate commodity total return index. We provide results for a strategy that invests in the S&P 500 and has 20% cash holdings (this equals the Sharpe ratio gain of 0.39 compared to the strategy that does not trade the payroll announcements).
Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The strategy is used as an overlay and addition to the portfolio that consists of S&P 500. Although the Sharpe ratio is better than the pure equity strategy, it is not guaranteed that the strategy could be used as a hedge.