Usually, equity strategies are performing poorly during high uncertainty periods. Yet, academic research recognizes some profitable strategies that can be used during such periods. This novel research is connected with personal savings rates, that are signiﬁcantly correlated with several macroeconomic state variables. According to the study, there are various reasons for the increase in consumer´s savings rates, for example, raising economic uncertainty, diminishing credit
availability and growing income risk. Therefore, if there is an established connection between savings rates and uncertainty periods, such a link could be utilized. If we can identify the relationship between stock and savings rate, we can identify stocks that should be profitable during high uncertainty periods (and on the other hand, unprofitable). The profitability stems from a finding that stocks that are positively correlated with savings rate are considered a safer stocks. Subsequently, investors do not mind paying higher prices for such stocks, what results in overpriced stocks that subsequently generate low returns. On the other hand, stocks that are uncorrelated are riskier and investors demand extra return as a compensation. One of the most straightforward solutions is to use a linear model (regression) to obtain savings rate beta of each stock, to identify the relationships between returns and savings rates. Lastly, and most importantly, the saving betas makes it possible to sort stocks according to their sensitivity to personal savings and construct a simple long-short strategy that consists of going long low beta stocks, and short high beta stocks.

Fundamental reason
Consumer´s savings rates can be caused by rising economic uncertainty, diminishing credit availability and growing income risk. Therefore, the main reason for the functionality is identifying stocks that are doing well during high uncertainty periods. One of the simplest approaches is to construct a simple linear model consisting of savings rate and consider the lowest beta stocks. On the other hand, the highest beta stocks should perform the worst during uncertainty periods. To sum it up, the main reason is the connection between uncertainty and savings rates. Moreover, also cross-sectional regression controlling for various factors suggest that there is a negative and signiﬁcant relationship between savings rate beta and future stock returns.
There is also a risk-based explanation. According to the paper, while low savings rate beta stocks earn higher expected returns to compensate for risk, high beta stocks can be considered as relatively safer. Investors are accepting lower subsequent returns and are willing to pay higher prices for these stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks traded on the NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq. Stocks with a price per share less than 5 dollars are omitted, to eliminate micro-caps and illiquid stocks. Firstly, the personal savings rate data are obtained from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. This rate is equal to personal income minus personal outlays and taxes. Additionally, one needs to consider the economic uncertainty index developed by Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015). To obtain savings rate beta, consider univariate monthly rolling regression of stock returns on the personal savings rate index over a 36-month ﬁxed window (equation 1). Secondly, stocks are sorted into quintiles, according to their savings beta. Long the lowest quintile and short the highest quintile, if the macroeconomic uncertainty index is below its own median (high economic uncertainty period). The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The strategy is identifying stocks that are doing well during high uncertainty periods.