To determine a company’s intrinsic value, equity analysts spend a considerable amount of time forecasting cash flows and earnings several years into the future, although the explicit forecast period represents a limited share of the total valuation. Instead, most of the company’s value is determined in the terminal period, i.e., the perpetuity that includes all years after the explicit forecast. Besides, the previous research indicates that the explicit forecast period is biased towards optimism as analysts tend to extrapolate the recent improvements in companies’ key ratios, such as the operating margins and returns on invested capital. Considering the shortcomings of the explicit period forecasts, Rasmussen and Thormann (2019) present a single-period Gordon growth model based on realized historical measures. The model assumes that a business will continue to generate cash flows at a constant rate forever and discounts these cash flows to the present. The primary objective is to estimate a company’s fair value solely with the terminal value of perpetuity and compare it to the current market value. To evaluate the model’s performance in practice, the authors develop a trading strategy that invests in companies from the S&P 500 universe with estimated fair values below their market cap. The results have demonstrated that systematic buying of undervalued companies identified by the Gordon growth model yields an average excess return of 14.63% per annum. Despite the weak performance of the value factor over the past decade, the model considerably outperformed its benchmark S&P 500, which posted an average excess return of only 10.33% p.a. over the same period.

Fundamental reason
The short-term sentiment in irrational markets can lead stock prices to deviate significantly from their fundamental values (DeLong et al., 1989). This mispricing creates opportunities for long-term value investing to outperform. The Gordon growth model attempts to estimate the fair value of a company under the assumption that the business will continue to generate cash flows at a constant rate into perpetuity. These cash flows must be discounted to the present value because a dollar earned today is worth more than a dollar earned tomorrow. The discount rate depends on how risky the company is and is usually expressed by a company’s weighted average cost of capital. If the estimated company’s fair value is higher than its current market cap, then the company is considered to be undervalued and should be bought. Conversely, if the estimated fair value is lower than the current market cap, then the company is overvalued and should be sold.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the S&P 500 index constituents, excluding financials and duplicates. At the end of each month, start the analysis by estimating the parameters into the Gordon growth fair value model. First, for each company in the universe, calculate the Free cash flow to firm (FCFF) as the last year’s Cash from operations minus the last year’s Cash from investments. Cash from operations and investments data can be found in Morningstar Direct and reflect the numbers reported in each company’s annual report (10-K). Second, assume that the FCFF of each company will grow by 3.95% per year into perpetuity. The assumed growth rate (g) represents the average growth of the nominal GDP in the US from 2003 to 2017. Third, estimate each company’s Weighted average cost of capital (WACC) using the data from Morningstar Direct. In particular, from each of Morningstar’s ten sectors, namely, Technology, Consumer cyclical, Healthcare, Energy, Communication services, Consumer defensive, Industrials, Basic materials, Utilities, and Real estate, pick ten companies to form sector samples. Use Morningstar’s WACC estimates for companies in the sector samples to compute the average sector WACC for each of Morningstar’s ten sectors. Assume that all companies in the universe within a particular sector have the exact WACC, equal to the corresponding sector average. Fourth, for each company in the universe, compute the Net interest bearing debt (NIBD) using the latest data from Morningstar Direct. Employ the following formula: NIBD = Long Term Debt & Capital Lease Obligations + Current Debt + Preferred Stock – Cash & Cash Equivalents – Securities – Short Investments. Finally, at the end of each month, compute each company’s fair value as: Fair Value = [(FCFF * (1 + g)) / (WACC – g)] – NIBD. Invest in companies with the ratio of their market cap to the fair value below one and above zero (all companies with a positive fair value higher than their market cap). The resulting portfolio is value-weighed and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - various presented strategies may provide an effective hedge in crisis times. As a proposal, we suggest taking a look at Returns in different time periods in Table 4.5.

In 2008 where the markets experienced the largest drop due to the financial crisis, all the strategies outperformed considerably. This suggests that the single-period valuations are relatively defensive during times of market turmoil.