Anomaly strategies usually pick stocks according to some pre-defined criteria, for example, strategies can sort stocks according to their momentum, size, beta, etc. A different approach is to consider trading strategies as assets and pick the best performing strategies. This approach seems to be very reasonable since academic literature has identified plenty of anomalies, but their performance could have diminished or could vary in time. Therefore, to overcome the problems mentioned above, it is possible to pick the best performing anomalies for trading. One of the possibilities is to choose the best performing anomalies based on their previous return. In other words, the momentum approach. Anomaly momentum is already included in our screener (strategy 293) but is also analyzed in this study.
Additionally, this novel research paper utilizes also a different approach. The sorting criteria are based on the value of stocks chosen by the anomalies. The set of anomalies includes 13 well-known and established anomalies such as size, ROA, PEAD and others (the full list is in table 1). Therefore, it is possible to pick the most profitable strategies by using the past year historical adjusted book-to-market ratio of stocks identified by the anomaly and selecting the “the largest value” anomalies. Investing in the most profitable strategies according to their value significantly increases the performance compared to the naive equal weighting of anomalies. Moreover, the value and momentum of anomaly strategies can be combined to improve the performance further, and this research paper has also analyzed this topic, providing valuable results for practitioners.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the paper identifies strong anomaly-value effects in portfolios formed by using anomaly strategies identified in the various previous academic research. This effect can be observed by enhanced performance compared to the equal weighting of anomaly strategies. Additionally, the strategy is robust to a variety of different specifications, such as using fewer winner anomalies, considering long and short legs of the anomaly separately or using an absolute signal instead of the relative. Most importantly, the anomaly value strategy is distinct from and cannot be explained by individual stock or industry value. Results suggest that also anomaly value can be connected with behavioural theories; more precisely, investors under-react to information relating to portfolios sorted based on anomaly characteristics. To sum it up, it appears that the returns of anomalies can be further enhanced by additional sorting. Double sorting stocks, firstly by anomalies and secondly, by the value factor leads to more profitable portfolios that cannot be explained by the value factor itself.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. Stocks with prices lower than 1USD and financials are excluded. Firstly, thirteen trading strategies are created (the full list is in table 1), and for each anomaly, stocks are sorted into value-weighted long-short portfolios. For each anomaly portfolio, the historical-adjusted book-to-market ratio is computed (for the stocks in the portfolio) as the t-1 year’s BM ratio minus the average BM ratio from t-6 to t-2 years. Invest in the seven anomalies with the highest adjusted BM ratios in the past year. The strategy is rebalanced yearly, and anomalies are equally-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.