Momentum is a well-documented anomaly in investment-related literature, which still serves as a basis for a vast universe of investment strategies. One of its shortcomings, however, lies in the occasional occurrence of substantial drawdowns. The recent study proposes a momentum-based investment strategy which significantly reduces the magnitude of drawdowns while keeping the returns significantly positive. This effect is obtained by combining the simple trend-following strategy with a so-called “counter-trend” strategy, which exploits the tendency of stocks to revert to their mean price. Such a strategy itself earns a similar return as the benchmark (S&P 500), but with markedly lower drawdowns. However, the combined strategy (referred to as “Opposites Attract” by the author) significantly outperforms both S&P 500 and NASDAQ Composite Index (12.2% vs. 5.5% and 7.0%, respectively), while at the same time recording a maximum drawdown more than four times lower than that of S&P 500 and almost seven times lower than that of NASDAQ.

Fundamental reason
The essence of this combined strategy lies in implementing a mechanism which reduces the impact of short-term reversals – the Counter Trend strategy. The strategy buys a chosen ETF only after significant market declines. The result is a considerably improved return/risk ratio.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe only consists of two ETFs/futures tracking two stock indices – NASDAQ Composite Index and S&P 500. The trend-following strategy monitors exponential moving averages (EMA) of NASDAQ Composite Index’s daily prices and applies the following trading algorithm: buy when the daily closing price is above both the 50-day and 150-day EMA; sell and move to cash when the daily closing price is below the 50-day and above the 150-day EMA, and sell short when the daily closing price is below both the 50-day and 150-day EMA. The Counter Trend strategy buys the S&P 500-tracking ETF if today’s low price is the lowest in the past 20 days and sells otherwise. An investor allocates 50% of his portfolio to each strategy.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy is timing equity market, but traders can split this strategy into two halves and use a short-only part of this strategy. After a careful backtest, this short-only strategy might be used as a hedge/diversification during market/economic crises.