Stock prices are influenced by different types of information. Generally, there are two types of news: economy-wide (macro) and firm-specific (micro) news. Most of the existing theories suggest that macro news make it harder to process earnings news. By contrast, a new research paper by Sheng (2017) suggests that macro news improve the processing of firm-level news. It considers as important news four types of macro announcements: the FOMC decision, Nonfarm Payroll, ISM PMI and Personal Consumption. They cover 23% of all trading days in the year. When one of this macro news is announced on the same day when earnings announcement, the immediate price reaction to a firm’s earnings surprise is significantly stronger, and the drift afterwards is weaker. So the earnings information released on macro-news days is incorporated into stock prices faster, leading to more efficient stock valuation. This suggests a complementary relationship between macro and firm-level news. A trading strategy that improves classical PEAD strategies (post-earnings announcement drift) can be created based on these findings. A new strategy focuses only on firms that have strong earnings announcements on days when there are no macro-news announcements.

Fundamental reason
The existing models focus on allocating attention between two dimensions: macro and micro news. But the model by Sheng (2017) takes into account also time devoted to other activities unrelated to the stock market. Investors may hierarchically allocate their attention among these non-market activities first, and then based on conditions on a stock market, divide the stock-market attention between macro and micro news. Macro news is usually attention-grabbing events, drawing investors’ attention to the stock market. As a result, investors’ attention is market-focused, allowing them to pay more attention to earnings announcements on macro-news days. Investors not only pay more attention to the stock markets on macro-news days but also trade more on such days. The trading volume reaction to earnings announcements confirms this theory as it is substantially higher on macro-news days.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all equities traded on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. The investor divides firms into deciles based on their earnings surprises. The earnings surprise is equal to the difference between actual earnings for the stock and the median forecast of analysts and then divided by the stock price (the formula is on page 9). At the beginning of every month, investor purchases firms that had in the previous month an earnings announcement on a non-macro-day and are at the same time in the group with highest earnings surprise. The non-macro day is defined as a day when none of the important macro news (the FOMC decision, Nonfarm Payroll, ISM PMI and Personal Consumption) is announced. The investor also sells short firms that announced on a non-macro day too but are in the group with lowest earnings surprises. The portfolio is equally weighted and is rebalanced every month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.