Academic research offers numerous insights into the correlation structure of bonds and equities. Moreover, it is well-established that the past performance of equities influences the bond returns and vice versa. This novel research adds to the literature by examining the influence of government bonds on country equity indices.
After examining data from 60 countries for 120 years, the authors demonstrate a new cross-sectional pricing anomaly – the bond yield change effect (BYC effect). The changes in bond yields have a significant influence on equity index returns. Moreover, the stock market within a country with the smallest increase in local 10-year government bond yields outperforms markets with the largest increase in yields. Secondly, the BYC effect is applied in practice, allowing international investors to construct efficient country-selection strategies with diversified global portfolios with improved risk returns. The advantage of these portfolios is that there is no need to reconstruct and rebalanced them frequently.

Fundamental reason
The behavioral bias of investors is one of the two main reasons for the BYC effect functionality. Investors act in many cases irrational, causing an increase in mispricing. More specifically, the investors tend to underreact to new information from changes in bond yields. The underreaction of investors is resulting from irrational bias towards an arbitrary benchmark figure. Further, it cannot be arbitraged straight away due to slow-moving capital. As a result, if the government bond yield decrease/increase, a downward/upward effect on equity price movement is spotted. Consistent with the findings, the authors show that the BYC effect is stronger after a large number of new information.
The second reason is that the BYC effect is driven by arbitrating limits. Analyzing accessible data from 1900 to 2019, it was discovered that before the 1970s, the BYC effect was especially strong. The reason behind it is that the capital was moving very slowly due to the emerging management industry. In the modern era, where we witnessed the growth of exchange-traded funds (ETFs), foreign investment, and the development of global markets, the BYC effect is approaching more balanced levels. Two cases had been observed. Firstly, when the market is not tracked by ETFs. Investors have an excellent opportunity to use mispricing for their benefit. Further, strategically allocate the capital in various countries. When the market is tracked by ETFs, it helps to reduce the arbitrage barriers.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of country equity indices (the full list is in Table A1), including developed and frontier equity markets. Firstly, construct the bond yield change as minus the difference in 10-year government bond yield to maturity over the past 12 months (yield to maturity at t-13 minus the yield to maturity at t-1). Secondly, sort corresponding country equity indices into quintiles based on the bond yield change. Finally, take a long position in the highest bond yield change quintile and a short position in the lowest quintile. Portfolios are equally weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper offers many subperiod tests, but there is no clear information about hedging properties. Perhaps the most informative is figure 3, which shows the performance over the sample.