The Book-to-Market ratio (B/M) used in the existing literature is not adequate to identify value and growth stocks. Using B/M as the benchmark cannot clarify whether the increase in B/M is contributed to the market value destruction or successful transformation of the market value to the book value. A novel but simple transformation of B/M, the intensity of B/M, has been made to capture the dynamics of growth options. The intensity of B/M (IBM) is defined as the excess B/M (against the historical mean of B/M) per unit of B/M’s standard deviation. Consequently, value stocks are the ones with higher IBM, and on the other hand, growth stocks are the ones with lower IBM. Consistent with the conventional wisdom, research has proved that IBM has a strong negative relationship with future cross-sectional stock returns even after controlling for main return predictors including B/M, aforementioned can be exploited to enhance returns. The intensity of B/M indicates that growth stocks are riskier than value stocks. Therefore, value stocks tend to have lower expected premium, while growth stocks tend to earn a higher expected premium. Moreover, IBM outperforms B/M in identifying value and growth stocks because it adjusts the change in B/M by its historical variation. The variation of B/M captures the uncertainty embedded in the shift from growth options to assets-in-place.

Fundamental reason
The intensity of the Book-to-Market ratio measure has extremely low correlations with both B/M and the volatility of historical B/M. Even though the intensity is a transformation of B/M, the low correlation indicates that they bear different information contents. High B/M is accompanied by high volatility of B/M. To measure the true increase in B/M, scaling the increase in B/M by its own historical volatility is needed. Based on time-series properties of the B/M ratio process, a simple transformation term (the intensity of B/M) is able to classify and capture the behaviour of future stock returns. Moreover, there is a high correlation between the intensity of B/M and past cumulative returns. Research has proved that the intensity of B/M has a strong negative relationship with stock returns in portfolios of medium size to the largest size.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE, Amex and NASDAQ stocks, except financial stocks, and stocks with the end of quarter share price less than 1$. Firstly, stocks are allocated to five Size groups (Size quintiles, from low to high). Using only the highest size quintile, stocks are sorted into quintiles according to their intensity of Book-to-Market ratio. The intensity of the Book-to-Market ratio is defined as the excess B/M per unit of B/M’s standard deviation. It is computed as a B/M at time t minus average B/M from period t-1 to period t-8 (previous eight quarters) divided by the B/M’s standard deviation, using previous eight quarter B/M from period t-1 to t-8. Long portfolio with the lowest intensity of B/M. Short portfolio with the highest intensity of B/M. The portfolios are value-weighted and are rebalanced on a quarterly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.