The study proposes a new investment strategy: the improved cross-asset time-series momentum (I-XTSM). According to the authors, profits from I-XTSM with those obtained from the standard time-series momentum strategy (TSM) and the recent cross-asset time-series momentum (XTSM) strategy of Pitkäjärvi et al. (2020) has significant profitability over other systems and can help investors avoid excess losses even in the face of economic turmoil. The I-XTSM can facilitate investors to obtain substantial profits by outperforming different strategies in the stock market, especially when the look-back period is 12 months and the holding period is 3 months of the portfolio; (K, H) (12,3) variant is therefore selected as our presented base case.

Fundamental reason
Scientists fill the research gap and contribute to the literature by proving that industrial metals assets, especially their signals, have robust predictive power for future stock returns. These results can be a good basis for future studies on asset pricing. The regression tests conducted to examine the correlation between the stock market and 24 common commodities show that the internal driving force for the profitability of the I-XTSM strategy is the significant predictive power of the signals of the industrial metals on the stock return. The I-XTSM shows significant performance, even after considering the factors of market exposure, and it can explain the excess profits of the TSM and XTSM strategies. The Sharpe and information ratios of I-XTSM are higher than other strategies, verifying the high performance of I-XTSM. The returns of the I-XTSM cannot be explained by the random probabilities, which verify the robust profitability of I-XTSM in time series. Our newly proposed I-XTSM strategy has implications for both practitioners and academics. Furthermore, another convincing advantage is that I-XTSM can effectively avoid excess losses from momentum collapse in economic turmoil periods. For academics, previous studies have often ignored the correlation between industrial metals and the stock market.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 1. the U.S. stock market index, and uses the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index (S&P500): ETF SPY, and 2. the risk-free interest rate asset; the product of your choice: be it Treasury bills (bonds or notes), or for example ETF BIL.
(Data should mainly come from Bloomberg, Federal Reserve Economic Data [FRED], and DataStream. Detailed descriptions and data sources of this study’s considered assets are provided in 2. Data Description and Further Table 1. The focus should be on obtaining accurate 19 common commodities asset spot prices and five commodity indexes.)

-1. I-XTSM uses the GSCI industrial metal index (GSCI-IND) as the cross-asset (instead of a bond asset for investment decisions [such as in the XTSM strategy of Pitkäjärvi et al. (2020)]). The look-back period (K) is selected as 12 months, and the holding period (H) is 3 months.
0. Calculate the MOMentum of both broad market and commodity indices.
1. Until the next re-evaluation after 3 months, act on four signals: a) If the regime is when the past stock return and cross-asset are positive, invest in a long position (buy) stock market asset.
b) If they are both negative, start a short position (sell) stock market asset.
c) If the stock signal is positive, but the cross-asset signal is negative, it means that the stock market is bullish. In this situation, though the stock has signs of a waning uptrend, it still has a positive return, and the regime is a long stock market.
d) However, the stock market is not favored if the stock signal is negative and the cross-asset signal is positive. Currently, the strategy’s regime is “jump out,” and investors should jump out of the stock market and invest in risk-free assets instead.

Portfolio invests only in one asset at a time (100%) and is rebalanced quarterly (every three months).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - However, with mixed results.
TSM and I-XTSM still maintained an upward trend and gradually widened the gap with the benchmark strategy; that is, the overall stock index had turned from an upward direction to a downward trend after the 2000 dot-com bubble crisis. The gap became more evident in 2008 when the global financial crisis (GFC) occurred. During this period, the benchmark strategy suffered an enormous loss. Still, momentum strategies such as TSM, XTSM, and I-XTSM successfully captured the information in the market and obtained a sizeable excess return. However, after the GFC gradually ended in 2009, the TSM strategy took a significant drawdown of profits, and most of the excess returns obtained in the crisis were lost during this year. The I-XTSM often shows good profitability amid economic turmoil, generating a significant profit during the COVID-19 crisis.