Sometimes a company issues several classes of shares. Those share classes are often entitled to equal cash flows from the issuing company, but they differ in voting rights. The prices of the multiple classes of shares could differ for rational reasons: the extra votes may have value or the market may value the extra liquidity provided by one class. This difference in price could be exploited. Academic research shows that significant abnormal returns are produced by the simple trading strategy of buying the cheaper class and shorting the more expensive class when the bid price of one exceeds the asking price of the other by a specified amount. The long side of these positions earns abnormal returns by themselves, so it is much easier to trade only the longs, which allows investors to avoid the issues of short selling.

Fundamental reason
Academic research postulates that voting shares may be more valuable if private benefits accrue to those who control the company through the ownership of voting stock. Differences in liquidity may also cause prices of dual-class shares to diverge. However, the value of votes and differences in liquidity are only part of the reason for the price discrepancies between voting and non-voting stock. An additional reason is market inefficiency, which allows shares to drift from efficient prices temporarily.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with a price greater than $5. Investors must find companies which have issued multiple share classes with equal cash flow rights. The prices for these pairs are then periodically checked every 2 minutes; the bidding and asking prices of the two classes of stocks are compared at the end of every two-minute period. If prices diverge by more than 0.5$, then a position is established. The buy orders for cheaper stock take place at the quoted prices in effect two minutes later. The position is closed when the prices for the two share classes converge. The portfolio of stocks is equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.