Stock returns are influenced to a great extend by the release of new information. Specifically, returns are connected with underreaction to news in the short term and overreaction in the long term. The academic research has mostly focused on explaining the dynamics and causes of the over and underreaction. In contrast, this novel paper contributes to the literature by investigating the cross-sectional differences in over and underreaction.
The research shows that reference prices influence the investor’s response to the news. Moreover, the news are measured quantitatively – days with extreme returns are considered to be news days. Firstly, there is an abnormal return defined as a difference between return for a particular day and return implicated the Fama French three-factor model and divided by the idiosyncratic volatility. If in absolute value it is bigger than two, it is defined as news day. Specifically, investors respond more strongly when the difference between the purchased price and the price at which the stock is trading right now is huge. Consequently, individual investors are more prone to sell a stock after receiving bad news, which implies that the difference between stocks’ trading price and the purchase price is much higher. Therefore, the authors construct a stock-level measure to determine the difference between stocks’ trading price and the purchase price for an average investor. As a result, this difference produces a large volume of cross-sectional variation on how big is the overreaction or underreaction to the news. To sum it up, the reference prices are broadly impacting the investor’s response to the news, and this effect could be exploited.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the logic behind reference prices and investors’ bias. Looking closely to examine whether reference prices impact the overall market outcomes, the authors constructed a stock-level measure to determine the difference between stocks’ trading price and the purchase price for an average investor. As a result, it was shown that the distance from the purchase price produces a large number of cross-sectional variations on how big is the overreaction or underreaction to the news.
Firstly, the largest difference between stocks’ trading price and the purchase price earns on events days with positive (negative) news a significantly higher (lower) average abnormal returns than stocks which trading price is much closer to their purchase price. Consistent with the stronger response of these stocks to the news, the stocks with trading prices that are the furthest away from the purchase price also showed greater return reversals after the day that news was released. In the following quarter (61 days), the offset difference between the stock furthest from its purchase price and the stock most close to its price is 4.13%. This strategy based on constructing a cross-sectional portfolio takes advantage of how stocks react to the news and is significant as it earns a monthly alpha of 0.93%.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). The primary variable of interest is the difference between the purchased price and the price at which the stock is trading right now (DPP), calculated monthly. DPP equation is based on the methodology of An (2016). The equation is a sum that consists of two multiplied main parts. The first part consists of “weights” – the probability that the stock was purchased for the purchase price and was not traded yet (based on stock’s turnover). The second part is defined as the absolute difference between the current price and purchase price from n periods before and then divided by the current price. For more details, see equation 3 on page 15. Secondly, establish the bad news days. The news are measured quantitatively – days with extreme returns are considered to be news days. Firstly, there is an abnormal return defined as a difference between return for a particular day and return implicated the Fama French three-factor model and divided by the idiosyncratic volatility. If in absolute value is bigger than two, it is defined as news day, and if the return is negative, it is a bad news day.
Each month, stocks are sorted into quintiles based on their DPP. The day after the bad day go long the stock from the top quintile (stocks with the highest DPP) or go short the stock from the bottom quintile (stocks with the lowest DPP). Hold for 60 working days.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not offer any insights to hedging properties of the strategy.