Text and unstructured data are an attractive potential source of alpha and arguably one of the most researched topics in the broader Machine Learning in finance literature. Given the finance domain, methods from other fields often do not work very well in economic contexts, and methods must be adapted ad hoc. Such an approach is taken in the Ke, Kelly, and Xiu paper that constructs a methodology to extract sentiment from news articles using a three-step procedure that is based on transparent steps that are proved to have desirable asymptotic properties based under relatively weak assumptions. Using the Dow Jones Newswires dataset, the most comprehensible and complete news dataset, they show the importance of screening for sentiment-charged words so that the joint distribution is only estimated on these words with higher signal-to-noise ratios. Further, they solve a supervised problem that models two topics – positive and negative. A probabilistic model is trained using a penalized regression that estimates the probability of a topic being drawn from a multinomial distribution that allows for prediction. For the training, each of the articles is associated with a stock return that could contain information about the sentiment. This method, albeit simple, shows a promising out-of-sample performance suggesting that the sentiment learned by the framework does indeed contain information about future asset price paths. One question, however, is the feasibility of such a strategy – as pointed out by the authors – given the turnover is very high and the transaction cost analysis suggests a significant reduction in performance.

Fundamental reason
Risk attribution analysis in the paper suggests that the model is relatively robust to the standard Fama French factors with an R-squared of a maximum of 38% for the long side and only 10% for the long-short portfolio. An interesting feature of the sentiment is a better predictive power in the smaller stocks, as shown by the difference in the risk-adjusted returns of the equal-weighted and value-weighted portfolios. One explanation for this could be that smaller stocks take a longer time to incorporate information about sentiment into their price compared to larger firms. Nevertheless, the paper shows that sentiment does carry predictive power and carries a lot of alpha. The approach to constructing sentiment in this paper is quite novel as the authors are the first to use the news dataset in the literature. There are other providers such as Ravenpack that use the dataset to construct their own sentiment measure they vendor to investors and also constitute the benchmarks in the study.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe is constructed with respect to the filtering of the dataset such that each security is matched to a respective news article. The sample spans the year 1989 through April 2020. News with more than one tagged stock and other filters described in Table 1 are applied to the dataset that ends up consisting of 6.3M articles for training. Textual data is cleaned and normalized using standard procedures such as lowercasing, stemming, and lemmatizing. A bag of words model is then created to encode the word counts into vectors. The screening for sentiment charged words is conducted using a supervised learning procedure where first a frequency measure is constructed. This measure looks at the frequency the word coincides with a positive return. Then the frequencies are compared to thresholds that can be learned as hyperparameters from the data. This marginal screening is done to improve the efficiency of estimation in the later topic modelling stage. With this set of relevant words, a two-topic model is fit, learning the probabilities of a word coming from a positive or negative topic and estimating the vectors of positive and negative sentiment scores. For more details see page 9. The third stage takes the estimated wordlist and topic space and estimates the sentiment out of sample. Using MLE estimation, the penalized regression is estimated to learn the sentiment with a Beta prior on the sentiment score that shrinks it to a neutral sentiment. The model is trained using a rolling window of 15 years for which the first 10 make the training set and the other five the validation set that also tunes the hyperparameters. A one-year window is then used for testing and portfolio construction. A long-short portfolio is formed every day at the open with a 30-minute delay based on the sentiment as a zero net portfolio that goes long the 50 most positively sentiment charged words and shorts the 50 with the most negative scores.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Although risk analysis is conducted in the paper, there is no evidence of the strategy being a good hedge in a bear market. We can only speculate that the strategy tends to take a positive equity beta despite having a net zero investment portfolio that could provide some neutrality. The relatively large drawdowns also suggest that the strategy probably suffers from selloff periods rather than provides a hedge.