Over the past decades, the global economy has undergone a rapid transition from a traditional economy dominated by physical assets and production processes to a knowledge economy fuelled by advancements in technology, research, human capital, and organizational capital. Consequently, intangible assets started to play a vital role in the growth of economies and firms around the globe. In a recent study, Ewens, Peters, and Wang (2020) estimate that intangible assets as a proportion of firms’ total assets have increased from 37% in 1975 to 60% in 2016. Despite the growing importance of intangible assets, the accounting and reporting rules for intangibles are outdated and provide limited information to investors (Lev, 2018). Bongaerts, Kang, and Van Dijk (2021) propose a novel approach to value firms’ intangible assets by measuring their intangible intensity (IAI). They calculate the IAI as a ratio of internally created (off-balance-sheet) intangible assets relative to total assets. In addition, their study examines whether intangible assets can explain the stock returns in the cross-section. To do so, they construct a new intangible (INT) factor that goes long on high IAI firms and shorts the low IAI firms. Their results have shown that the INT factor exhibits a statistically significant annual return of 4.66% with a respective Sharpe Ratio of 0.51. Findings from the Fama and MacBeth (1973) regressions revealed that a one-standard-deviation shift in IAI results in a 1.6 percentage point change in an annualized return. Besides, due to its strong negative correlation with HML (value, -0.58), RMW (profitability, -0.26), and CMA (investment, -0.32) factors, the INT factor provides a hedge to value and quality strategies.

Fundamental reason
Under U.S. GAAP, most internally generated intangible assets are not recognized on the balance sheet. For instance, R&D expenditures on innovation, patents, or software are expensed in the same fiscal year they are spent. In contrast, similar but externally acquired intangible assets such as patents and trademarks are capitalized and reported on the balance sheet in the form of goodwill. In today’s world dominated by the knowledge economy, the internally created intangible assets represent a significant portion of firms’ total capital but continue to be off-balance-sheet. The failure to reflect the value of these intangible assets can lead to significant accounting mismeasurement of important firm characteristics such as book equity and earnings (Srivastava, 2014). Naturally, such mismeasurement is likely to be most severe for firms with higher levels of intangibles. Thus, when it comes to companies’ valuation, investors commonly rely on fundamental characteristics that, in the case of high IAI firms they may not reflect the reality. Therefore, investors underestimate the future profitability of high IAI firms due to their information complexity leading to their higher future returns as the mispricing gets corrected in the following years. The Fama-French five-factor model can’t explain this anomaly. What’s more, including the INT factor into the FF5 model improves the model, making the investment factor redundant.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks in Russell 3000 index omitting financial firms. Firstly, estimate internally created knowledge capital (KC) for each firm following the equation (1): KC = (1 – δ) * KC in period t-1 + R&D, where KC is the end-of-period knowledge capital, δ is the R&D depreciation rate, and R&D is the R&D expenditures during period t. Use the industry-specific R&D depreciation rates from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Secondly, following equation (2), estimate the firm’s internally created organizational capital (OC) as OC = 0.8 * OC in period t-1 + 0.3 * SG&A, where OC is the end-of-period organizational capital, and SG&A is the SG&A expenses during period t. Thirdly, calculate a firm’s intangible asset intensity (IAI) following equation (4): IAI = (KC + OC) / (TA + KC + OC – GW), where TA is the total firm’s assets, and GW is the firm’s goodwill at the end of period t. Fourthly, split the investment universe into two size groups, the Russell 1000 big stock universe, and the Russell 2000 small stock universe. Then, within each size group, sort stocks by their IAI into three portfolios based on the breakpoints for the top 30% (High Intangibles), middle 40% (Medium Intangibles), and bottom 30% (Low Intangibles). In each size group, buy the high intangibles portfolio and sell the low intangibles portfolio. Weigh the resulting two long and two short portfolios equally and rebalance each year.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It’s evident from Figure 1 and also by the max drawdown examination.