Moving averages are widely used by practitioners, and in the past, moving averages have received a lot of attention in the literature. There is plenty of evidence that moving averages are predictive of equity returns to economically significant degrees. Naturally, one could combine moving averages and construct an unconsidered technical indicator, the distance between short- and long-run moving averages of past price. The reason is simple and obvious, it has a surprisingly strong predictive power for returns, and this power goes beyond other often used rules as well as a comprehensive set of other return predictors. Novel research proved that the greater the positive distance between a short run (21-day) and long-run (200-day) average, the higher is the average return, and vice versa, greater the negative distance between a short and long average, the lower is the average return. Aforementioned strategy (moving average distance or MAD) yields reliable profits that do not decay even after several months, but most importantly, the returns are economically and statistically significant. The proposed strategy can be formed in many ways, going long when MAD is higher than one and going short when MAD is lower than 1, deciles or various thresholds. Moreover, every strategy can be constructed with various holding periods. However, for the representative purposes, we would centre our attention around MAD threshold 0.2 (long the stocks with MAD equal or higher than 1.2 and short stocks with MAD equal or lower than 0.8) with a monthly rebalancing period.

Fundamental reason
Because the MAD stock profits do not show signs of reversal even after the time period of two years, evidence accords with investor underreaction as the source of profits. The MAD effect probably occurs because of the fact that the investors get anchored to the 200-day moving average – a smoothed estimate of the stock’s recent price history. The anchoring bias implies that agents deviate insufficiently from the anchor in forming estimates of future stock prices. A potential implication of the anchoring hypothesis is that when MAD is large and positive, the market should continue to underreact to the future good news and of course, vice versa. Moreover, the moving average distance (MAD) survives a long list of other anomalies, including standard momentum, the moving average binary crossing rule, “trend” factor, short- and long-run reversals, the 52-week high, post-announcement earnings drift, analyst’s revisions and forecast dispersions. Additionally, the profitability of the MAD strategy remains significant in the 2001-2016 period, even when a number of other anomalies have been shown to decay considerably. Comparing MAD to the other anomalies, while several prominent anomalies extract their profitability from the short-leg of trade, the MAD strategy is able to yield significant returns on both the long and short-leg of a trade. Last but not least, the strategy is profitable if trading costs are included.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all U.S. firms listed on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ with share codes 10 and 11 with a positive equity book value in Compustat for the previous year. Excluded are stocks with an end-of-month price below $5, stocks that are not traded during the month, stocks that do not record return observations for the previous 12 months and stocks for which there are no available records to construct firm characteristics known to predict the cross-section of average returns.

Firstly, construct the MAD as MA(21) divided by the MA(200), where MA(21) is the stock price moving average based on 21 trading days (approximately the past one month), and MA(200) is the corresponding 200-day moving average. Using a threshold set a fixed value of 0.2, long the stocks with MAD equal or higher than 1.2 and short stocks with MAD equal or lower than 0.8. Stocks are equally-weighted, and the strategy is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.