Thanks to the boom and popularity of social media, sharing your opinion with the wide public has never been easier. This also influences the world of investments. One of the recent studies documented, that almost third of affluent investors in the United States rely on social media to inform their investment decisions. With the rise of media, there have also appeared several platforms, where non-professional traders can share their ideas and analyzes. One of the most popular such a platform, where more than 7,000 research reports per month are published, is Seeking Alpha (SA). Despite the growing importance and popularity of this platform, until now, there has been almost no research on the cross-section of skill across the thousands of SA contributors.
However, new research from Michael Farrell et al. (2020) tries to provide evidence, of how successful are the ideas and analyzes in the cross-section of these unprofessional traders, and whether there exists a way of earning a stable abnormal return when following their advice. For doing that, the authors measure each contributors skill as an average of six-factor alpha returns that would investor earn if he followed the latest ten analyzes of the particular contributor. With sorting the universe of SA contributors by their alpha returns, a trading strategy, which follows reports of contributors in the top quintile of past alpha would earn an abnormal annual return of 12,42% from 2005 to 2017, even after incorporating the bid-ask spreads and 24-hour delay in reacting to investment research. A related study, also from Farrell et al. (2020), documented, that many retail investors respond to SA research within 30 minutes of its release, so the considered 24-hour delay is longer than necessary for many attentive investors. Therefore, the gained abnormal returns can be even greater if the investor limits the reaction time to newly published research.

Fundamental reason
Further findings show that there exist a significant outperformance of contributors in the top quintile of past alpha, which is robust to different risk-adjustments, different measures of past performance, and different holding periods.
The fact that neither retail nor institutional investors recognize the sizeable differences in skill across SA contributors helps explain why following the recommendations of the top SA contributors remains a profitable investment strategy even after incorporating trading delays.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks advised by Seeking Alpha contributors. The sample of considered SA reports is limited to those, which are associated with common stocks (CRSP share codes 10 and 11) and analyze only one particular stock. Then, each report is assigned either as: positive (long), negative (short), or neutral; using a two-step procedure. First, all reports in which a contributor discloses a long (short) position in the stock are classified as positive (negative). For all remaining reports, the tone of the report is computed as the percentage of negative words in the report, where the negative word list is taken from Loughran and McDonald (2011). Reports in the bottom (top) tercile of Percent Negative relative to the distribution of report tone on the previous day are assigned as positive (negative). The reports with neutral tone (middle tercile of Percent Negative sort) are excluded from the sample.
Then, calculate each SA contributors past alpha, as an average of alpha returns of his latest ten reports. The alpha return of report by a given contributor is calculated as the signed difference (+1 for a long position or -1 for a short position) between two products: one plus the return of the stock in the report and one plus the return of the benchmark. Therefore, the difference consists of two cumulated returns – one of the discussed stock and one of the benchmark. The benchmark is given as the return of Fama French five factors plus Carhart´s momentum factor that are multiplied by the estimated betas of the stock in the report. Betas are estimated using daily returns over the 272 to 21 trading days before the report release. Measure the return of report from day 0 (publishing day) for 63 trading days. To calculate contributors past alpha, we consider only reports, where we are able to measure this 63 trading days return.
Finally, at the end of each month, the contributors are sorted based on their average past alpha. For the following month, we follow and open positions in particular stocks according to the reports of the top quintile of contributors with the highest average past alpha. The position in each trade is held for 63 trading days.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It is a long-short equity strategy.