So far, academic research has produced many papers that have identified anomalies in the financial markets. There seem to be many possible predicting variables that produce long-short portfolio sorts. Moreover, it creates possibilities for novel machine learning algorithms. Machine learning methods can combine various predictors in the hope that it would outperform simple sorting methods.
This novel research is related to past research and machine learning algorithms. The aim of the paper is to explore all possible combinations of published anomalies through a double-sorting. To be more precise, authors explore double-sorted portfolios based on 102 anomalies identified by the academic research so far. The logic is clear; the aim is to find the most profitable combination of anomalies through double sorts. The idea of double sorts is nothing new in the financial markets; after all, the strategy can be characterized as one complex that is built from simpler building blocks.
Interestingly, the performance is comparable to the machine learning based portfolios. However, the machine learning algorithms are usually black-boxes, and the resulting portfolios are not “transparent”, and frequently, the economic logic is not clear. On the other hand, double-sorting offers a clear economic intuition.
Naturally, the sorting can be utilized in a trading strategy, where the practitioner trades the best performing strategy, portfolio intersections or top deciles. Paper offers many variants, but among them, there is also a variant where only known strategies at the time are possible to be utilized in the strategy. The approach is the most realistic simulation of real trading, and therefore, we would centre our attention around this variation.

Fundamental reason
The reason for the functionality lies in the successful identification of the best anomaly interactions (double sorts). The logic is simple; the simple strategies are building blocks that are built together into one complex strategy with superior performance. Moreover, the fundamental reason for the functionality is also closely related to the fundamental reasons for each strategy. For example, very profitable combinations could be made from ST rev, Momentum, Illiquidity or Volume.
Additionally, the proposed trading strategy consisting of investing in the best backwards-looking double-sorted strategies (or strategy) recursively out-of-sample is a very realistic trading simulation, which ensures that the results should be in a large extent applicable in practice.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX or NASDAQ. Firstly, consider 102 anomalies as in Green et al. (2017). Based on anomalies, 5×5 double-sorted portfolios are created. Looking backwards, identify the best performing long-short strategy based on the Sharpe ratio (paper also offers results for the top decile of strategies). The best strategy is traded and rebalanced monthly. Stocks in the portfolios are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide any information about the usage of the strategy as a hedge.