Momentum (buying winners and selling losers) is a well-documented anomaly in nearly every market. However, if a stock in the winner group is in the final stages of overreaction, it is not the best buy because of the high probability of its reversal, and therefore profit reduction. Similarly, in the loser group, a stock which is in the final stages of overreaction is also not the best seller because its reversal would lower the profit of short selling. Based on this logic, the momentum-reversal strategy seeks to buy winners and sell losers that are less likely to be in the final stages of overreaction.

Fundamental reason
Momentum occurs because traders are slow to revise their previous impression when new information arrives, and traders also overreact to prior knowledge when it is confirmed by new intelligence. Short-term and long-term reversal effects in stocks are also well-documented anomalies. Therefore, it makes sense to combine those two anomalies and buy strong momentum stocks with a low probability of reversal.

Simple trading strategy
All stocks on NYSE and NASDAQ are used as the investment universe. All stocks are sorted based on their past 12-month return in each month. Stocks are then sorted into 3 portfolios (top 30% – winner group W, middle 40% and bottom 30% – loser group L). In the winner group, stocks are further classified into two categories: the return-increasing winner (IW) and return-decreasing winner (DW) using the last month’s geometric average rate of return (GARR) compared to the last 12 month GARR (if the last month GARR is greater than the last 12-month GARR, then it is an increasing winner and vice-versa).
GARR(last 12 months) = (1+return in month 12)^(1/12) * (1+return in month 11)^(1/12) * etc. * (1+return in month 1)^(1/12) – 1
GARR(last month) = (1+return in last month)^(1/12) – 1
The loser group is divided into increasing loser (IL) and decreasing loser (DL) groups using a similar methodology. The investor then goes long stocks from the DW group and short stocks from the IL group. The portfolio is created as equally weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.

