One strand of literature states that markets are efficient, while the other tries to identify anomalies and strategies that contradict this hypothesis. Research by Prentis (2011) adds to the second strand of the literature. It suggests a trading rule that should produce higher returns with lower risk than the passive market investment represented by the S&P 500. According to the author, the rule can be successful because of the emotions such as fear or greed. Since emotions largely influence the market, the prices might not always represent the intrinsic value. Based on these assumptions, the author suggests a technical rule that closes the S&P 500 position at relative maxima and instead invests in the safe Treasury bills and buys the S&P 500 at relative minima. The backtest shows that the technical rule outperforms the passive S&P 500 allocation with a lower risk since the strategy is not permanently invested, and when the S&P 500 is trending down, it switches into safe bills.

Fundamental reason
The proposed strategy is essentially a risk-on and risk-off trend-following system. The strategy aims to follow the trend and switch to the safe bills at the top. But, on the other hand, it should change to equities again at the bottom.
However, the rule seems to be untransparent, and the paper does not explain why it should work. We believe that there is a high chance that the strategy is overfitted, but after all, it is an example of a technical strategy. Therefore, a thorough out-of-sample analysis should be made.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P 500 mutual fund (ETF) and 3-month Treasury bills. The strategy consists of selling the index (closing the long position) at relative maxima and buying the index at relative minima. At the close of the trading on the last trading day of each month, calculate the nine-month SMA (simple moving average) trend line function. Find the first derivative of the trend line function. If the derivative is negative, the slope of the nine-month SMA is lower or equal to the tangent of 355°, the slope of the two-month SMA is lower or equal to the tangent of 353°, and either (or both) opening price of the S&P 500 or closing price of the S&P 500 is below the nine-month SMA sell signal is triggered. At the close of the first trading day of the following month, close the S&P 500 position and invest in 3-month Treasury bills. This decision is valid for the subsequent two months, and even if the buy signal is triggered, the portfolio does not change. If the derivative is positive and the slope of the nine-month SMA is higher or equal to the tangent of 5°, the buy signal is triggered. At the close of the first trading day of the following month, close the position in bills and buy the S&P 500. The allocation decision is made at the end of each month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - According to the paper, the strategy should switch to Tbills during crises. However, the rebalancing period is monthly, so it would be slow to react.