Supply chain often involves important and explicit contract arrangements, while creating an economically significant bond between two firms. Nowadays, in modern economies, firms are increasingly closely connected through supply chains as a result of the specialization. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect information externalities due to the close connection of firms along the supply chain. Research has proved that the occurrence of major customer’s stock price crashes has reliable predictive power for supplier’s stock price crashes in the near future. Stock price crash of the major customer significantly correlates with the contemporaneous crash risk of suppliers.
Moreover, the aforementioned crashes almost double the likelihood for the supplier to experience a stock price crash in the following two weeks. Although one needs to take into an account that the delayed crash transmission occurs only when the customer, who suffered a crash, is important to the supplier in term of sales. Regulations require public firms to disclose in interim financial reports to their shareholders’ customers that account for more than 10% of their total sales, offering a way for investor how to identify the major customers of a given firm. Findings of the research are robust to controlling for supplier firm characteristics that can be related to stock price crash risks, supplier past stock crashes, past excess stock returns of the supplier and its customers, industry, industry-year and firm fixed effects. Naturally, a long-short trading strategy can be constructed using the delayed crash transmission, generating significantly positive abnormal returns.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, findings of the research suggest that the delayed impact of customer’s stock price crashes to a supplier firm’s crash risk is more likely to occur if there exists a greater economic dependence of a supplier on its major customers. Secondly, pseudo tests show that findings are absent in the fictitiously assigned supplier-customer pairs, proving that the main results mainly reflect delayed contagion effects along the supply chain instead of mere industry co-movements. Stock price crashes, are extreme price movements and naturally are attention-grabbing classical events. Therefore, limited investor attention has little explanatory power of this anomaly. However, tests indicate that the information opacity of the supplier firm, rather than limited attention of investors to customer stock price crashes, hampers information processing leading to significant delays in crash transmission across supply chain partners. Lastly, results show that the delayed transmission of crashes in the supply chain occurs if the supplier firms have a greater dispersion of analyst’s earnings forecast, lower levels of analyst’s coverage, lower institutional ownership and smaller market capitalization.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 2,686 unique suppliers and 1,071 unique customers using Compustat segment files (based on data from source research paper) while excluding financial firms.

A practical difficulty is that the Compustat segment files list only abbreviated names of customers, to solve this problem authors generated a list of potential matches to the customer name, firstly using a string-matching algorithm to compare the number and order of the letters in the abbreviated names with those in the company names listed in the CRSP. After that, they manually checked for the potential matches to ensure matching accuracy.

Firstly, jumps and crashes are defined with a rolling regression approach using weekly returns in the past 52 weeks (the jump/crash week is included). A crash week occurs if the firm-specific weekly return is at least 3,2 standard deviations below the mean weekly firm-specific return over the past 52 weeks and the jump week occurs if the firm-specific weekly return is at least 3,2 standard deviations above the mean.

Long jump customer suppliers and short crash customer suppliers. The portfolio is value-weighted with a holding period of 20 trading days starting from the next trading day following the jump or crash week. The portfolio is rebalanced daily by dropping suppliers that reach the end of their holding periods and adding suppliers whose customers just experienced a stock price jump or crashed in the past week.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.