Simple momentum anomaly is not only recognized by the academics, but the anomaly is also widely used by the practitioners. However, the research is still able to modify and expand the original and simple idea to construct slightly more complicated strategies that have some added value against the simple momentum. Moreover, what was originally found in the individual stocks was later expanded to equity indexes, sub-portfolios and even into different asset classes. The sub-portfolio in this paper (industry sub-portfolios, value sub-portfolios and size sub-portfolios) could be characterized as a group of stocks managed together as though they constituted a tradable fund or the sub-portfolio could actually be a fund (author suggest that the strategy could be used in practice by the usage of ETFs and he also made the analysis in the most recent years with the usage of ETFs). The goal was to identify better management of portfolios consisting of funds or sub-portfolios with a possibility to stay in cash.

One of the many ways of the aforementioned better management is momentum with avoiding the use of hindsight. The idea of the strategy is based on the optimization of the number of sub-portfolios that are held each month, where the number of sub-portfolios held is dependent on the relationship of a sub-portfolio versus the cash. Subportfolio is only held if it´s momentum beats the momentum of cash. Moreover, the lookback period is dynamically adjusted to find the optimal lookback period each month. Such approach that allows for optimization for the return or the Sharpe ratio (we have picked the variant for the Sharpe ratio, but more variants can be found in the paper) naturally beats the benchmark that consists of equally-weighted sub-portfolios. Last but not least, as we have previously mentioned, the strategy was also examined in a subsample that consisted from the most recent years and real ETFs and the same methodology was able to beat the benchmark.

Fundamental reason
The fundamental reason for the functionality is the same as that of the classical momentum, which is usually connected with behavioural biases. If the simple anomaly works, usually the “upgraded” strategy also works. Naturally, if the fixed lookback period that is not optimized is found to be working, the more optimal lookback period is as good or even better. On the other hand, actively managing a portfolio of some funds or sub-portfolios tries to avoid crashes of all kinds. Although the strategy of selling lowest-momentum securities short might be seen as a hedge, there have been certain peculiar failures of it. However, there seems to be a simple and different solution that bails out of long positions in funds when the momentum of funds does not exceed that of the returns on cash. Such addition results in smoother performance compared to a benchmark. Last but not least, according to the paper, the strategy would be able to avoid 2007-2008 debacle.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of French’s ten equally-weighted industrial-sectors (sector ETFs can be probably easy used as a proxy). The maximal lookback period is 18 months; therefore, there are 180 combinations as the strategy could be formulated. The momentum of a sub-portfolio is measured as the trailing exponential average of the monthly returns (EMAR), and the exact formula is on page 5. At the end of each month i EMAR is used to determine for every possible number of sub-portfolios and lookback periods, the positions that are to be held during the next month by optimizing the number of sub-portfolios held and lookback period for the best Sharpe ratio. Additionally, the portfolio does not hold a long position in a sub-portfolio if its trailing momentum measure does not exceed that of cash. If the momentum of the excess return is not positive, then no position is taken, and portfolio invests into cash. For example, if two sub-portfolios do not beat the cash, 2/10 of the portfolio are in cash. The strategy is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Sector rotation strategies are the most often implemented in a long-only variant, which means, that they are not suitable to hedge equity market risk.