The relation between risk and expected return is a central issue in finance with broad implications for investment behaviour, corporate finance and market efficiency. One of the major stylized facts on the risk-return relation, indeed in empirical asset pricing more broadly, is the observation that assets with low risk have high alpha, the so-called “low-risk effect”. The academic paper by Asness, Frazzini, Gormsen, Pedersen has come with a strategy that is based on the theory that the low-risk effect is driven by leverage constraints and risk should be measured by systematic risk. To measure this, the strategy uses a new factor called betting against correlation (BAC) factor, which is derived from betting against beta (BAB) factor. As soon as beta depends on both, volatility and correlation, and only volatility is related to idiosyncratic risk, BAC neutralizes volatility by the following procedure: strategy goes long stocks that have a low correlation to the market and shorts those with high correlation while seeking to match the volatility of the stocks that are bought and sold. The BAC is then relatively unrelated to the behavioural-based factors because long and short sides of BAC have similar average volatility and skewness.

Fundamental reason
Two main explanations exist for the low-risk effect. First, one uses leverage constraints and says that risk should be measured by systematic risk and beta. The second one is explained by behavioural effect, so the risk should be measured by idiosyncratic risk. The strategy focuses on explanation by leverage constraints through dividing beta to volatility and market correlation. After neutralizing the volatility inside the portfolio by using factor BAC (betting against correlation), the portfolio produces strong performance in the US and internationally too, supporting leverage constraint theories. Also, both BAC and BAB have higher future returns when ex-ante margin debt is low, so when the leverage constraints are high. Contemporaneous increases in margin debt are associated with positive returns to BAB and BAC, consistent with the theory that investors shift their portfolios towards low-risk stocks when leverage constraints decrease.

To test the theory about the behavioral effect, the study uses low MAX return (LMAX) adjusted for volatility what then makes it scaled-MAX (SMAX) factor. This factor captures lottery demand in a way that is not as mechanically related to volatility, but it is more about the shape of the return distribution. After providing different type of tests and controls ( the Fama-French factors and short-term reversal), LMAX and IVOL (idiosyncratic volatility) turned out to have insignificant alphas when control for BAB. So the first theory about leverage constraints and measuring risk by systematic risk and beta turned to be a better one.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all US stocks. At the beginning of each month, stocks are ranked in an ascending order based on the estimated volatility at the end of the previous month. The ranked stocks are assigned to one of five quintiles. Within each quintile, stocks are assigned to one of two portfolios: low correlation to market and high correlation to the market. In these portfolios, stocks are rank-weighted by correlation (lower correlation stocks have larger weights in the low correlation-portfolios, and larger correlation stocks have larger weights in the high-correlation portfolios). The strategy is long with low-correlation and short stocks with high-correlation in each volatility quintile. The quintiles are weighted equally, and the portfolio is rebalanced every month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.
