Academic research has identified the major influence of pre-scheduled macroeconomic announcements on market prices. Naturally, information about inflation, unemployment, or interest rates affects stock prices. Studies have shown that market portfolio during the macroeconomic announcements is highly profitable, which is connected with a dynamic process through which major macroeconomic news is reflected in stock prices. Investors react fast when good news is announced, and as a result, the slope of the security market line is significantly positive on pre-scheduled announcement days. Since these days are well-known in advance, such a pattern could be easily exploited. However, after a big jump, there is a correction. This leads to a strategy that would be exposed to the market as much as possible, but the position should be liquidated after the announcement day to avoid the correction. To be more precise, the research shows that it is profitable to long high beta stocks and short the low beta stocks during announcement days. The reasons and more information about the aforementioned correction are in our screener in “Macroeconomic Announcement Beta Reversal,” because the correction is also a possibility for a profitable trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the aggregate market return is significantly higher on announcement days compared to regular days. Secondly, the idea of the strategy could be easily understood with the basic knowledge of linear regression (and CAPM asset pricing model). The security market line has a significantly positive slope, but insignificant intercept during announcement days. This validates the classic Capital Asset Pricing Model but, more importantly, explains why it is highly profitable to go long high beta stocks and to go short, low beta stocks. In the CAPM model, if the return is explained by the slope (beta factor) and the intercept (alpha) is insignificant, it means that the performance can be solely attributed to the beta factor – the exposition to the market. As a result, it is profitable to go long the high beta stocks while shorting the low beta stocks. Or in other words, exposing to the positive slope as much as possible.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the highest and lowest beta deciles of CRSP stocks based on their pre-ranking CAPM beta, according to NYSE cut-offs, based on monthly returns for the past five years. The exact number of stocks depends on the needs of a diversification. Days with macroeconomic announcements are dates with pre-scheduled news announcements about employment situation, inflation and the Federal Open Market Committee meetings. During the announcement day, buy the highest beta decile and short the lowest beta decile. The positions are held for one day.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.