Idiosyncratic volatility, the part of volatility that can’t be explained by any known models, is alluring because of the known premium it generates. So far, academics haven’t reached a consensus on the explanation of this problem. Some attribute idiosyncratic volatility to behavioral reasons, others claim it has risk-based explanations.
The authors of this study propose a combined explanation of this phenomenon, and they try to explain idiosyncratic volatility by a combination of market and fundamental news. In their view, fundamental news can be approximated by using a 52-week price high and the market part by calculating expected profitability. By constructing a function grounded on previous research by other authors, they find that this newly constructed measure of expected profitability has great predictive value for future returns. Similar to the predictive power of profitability measure, expected profitability can also predict future returns. This is why the expected profitability can be used to create a long-short trading strategy, whose performance is mainly driven by shorting the stocks with low expected profitability.

Fundamental reason
Since profitability is a good well-known predictor for future stock performance, it is rather intuitive to assume that the expected profitability will be too. The authors construct expected profitability measure based on the various research done by other authors in the past, incorporating their findings into the equation – such as Tobin’s q profitability (whose predictive power has been already shown by Hou & Robinson (2006) and Hou & van Dijk (2019)), dividend related variables and also accruals. The strategy is statistically and economically significant and produces a significant alpha which can’t be explained by other pricing models.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks traded on the London Stock exchange, excluding financial firms, stocks of prices less than £3, stocks in the formation period, and stocks with negative book equity. Stocks are sorted into deciles based on EROA, the expected profitability for the subsequent year.
EROA is calculated following a regression on the top of page 8 of the research paper, that is, the input variables are the following: sum of market equity with total liability scaled by book asset, the ratio of dividend payment to book value equity, the percent accruals (measured as a change in operating assets scaled by the absolute value of net income), whether the firm has negative earnings and whether the firm pays out dividends or not.
Long the highest EROA decile, short the lowest. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include any information regarding this topic.