Some firms have relatively steady sales throughout the year, for example, restaurant chains. However, other firms display highly seasonal sales patterns that are unavoidable and reflect the dynamics of the firm’s product markets. Interestingly, the seasonal fluctuations in sales are highly predictable and well known in advance. Moreover, research has proved that this publicly available information can forecast future stock returns. While using a simple measure of sales seasonality, the paper has found out that low-sales-season firms tend to outperform high-sales-season firms significantly. Utilizing the aforementioned fact, a long-short strategy of buying stocks at the beginning of the given firm’s low season and shorting them at the beginning of their high season generates more than solid annual alpha resulting in large economic gains that are statistically significant.

A large amount of anomalies is getting weaker by the time, indicating that the effect was strong in the past. Still, nowadays, the anomaly is else statistically insignificant or simply not profitable if transaction costs are included. In light of the previous, it is interesting that the seasonality premium documented in the results of this study appears to have strengthened over time. Over the periods 1977-1986 and 1987-1996, the annual average alpha was approximately 5.4%; over the period 1997-2006, the alpha increased to 9.4%; and during the period 2007-2016, it grew to 15%.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the empirical results are independent of previously documented seasonal anomalies. Moreover, findings show that both the sales and earnings anomalies coexist in the cross-section of stocks returns. There is some evidence implying that a seasonal asset-growth anomaly may partially explain the sales-seasonality anomaly (high-sales-season firms are positively correlated with those of high-asset growth firms). However, this explanation cannot be entirely satisfactory, as a large portion of the premium documented in this paper originates in low-sales-season firms. Secondly, there is major evidence, that investors are paying less attention to stocks during those quarters in which firms generate the smallest fraction of their sales, which is according to the study, the main and fundamental reason for the functionality.
Furthermore, there is no evidence that other well-known factors have already captured the predictive power of sales seasonality. The long-short spread between low-sales season stocks and high-sales season stocks remains unaffected even after controlling for Fama and French’s five factors or momentum. Last but not least, many anomalies are not robust to the use of value-weighted portfolios, the elimination of microcaps and has the t-statistics below 3, but the Sales Seasonality Premium easily satisfy all these conditions.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all non-financial U.S. stocks from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) files listed on the NYSE, AMEX or NASDAQ exchanges. Stocks with CRSP shares codes 10 or 11 (common equity) are excluded. Firstly, to measure the seasonality of the sales, the investor has to construct a quarterly variable SEA[q,t], which is equal to the SALES[q,t] (sales in quarter q of year t) divided by the ANNUALSALES[t] (annual sales in year t). To mitigate any potential impact of outliers, calculate AVGSEA[q,t], which is equal to the average of SEA[q,t] over the years t-2 and t-3. Nextly, allocate stocks at the beginning of each month into deciles based on the level of their ex-ante measure of sales seasonality, AVGSEA[q,t] in year t-2. Long the lowest decile and short the highest decile. The value-weighted portfolio is held for one month and then rebalanced at the beginning of the next month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The source research paper shows nearly 0 correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, this strategy probably can’t be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.