Value anomaly (the outperformance of fundamentally cheap stocks, which could be measured for example by high Book-to-Market ratios) and the PEAD effect (Post-earnings announcement drift, i.e., the tendency for stocks to drift after positive earnings announcements) are two academically well-documented anomalies. Both of them show strong performance on their own, and a combined strategy shows even better results. The trading strategy takes a long position in value stocks when both earnings surprises and EARs (earnings announcement returns) are positive and a short position in glamour (growth) stocks when both are negative. The strategy presented is long-short, but research shows that most of the performance comes from the long bets; therefore, this strategy could easily be implemented also as long-only (which simplifies the strategy’s implementation).

Fundamental reason
Both PEAD and value anomaly are academically well described. Therefore, a combined strategy could exploit the advantages of each anomaly and should be more successful than separate ones.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks from NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. EAR is calculated as the equally-weighted size-adjusted abnormal returns in a 3-day window centered on the earnings announcement date. Earnings surprises are measured as the difference between the actual and expected EPS (mean analyst forecast of EPS for the firm) divided by the absolute value of the expected EPS. Sales-growth is the average of the annual growth in sales over the previous three years.

At the end of June, stocks are sorted into quintiles based on Sales-growth (lowest – value, highest – growth). Then, every quarter, each stock is allocated into six sub-samples in terms of the signs of the earnings surprise (+/-/0) and EAR (+/-). The strategy takes a long position in value stocks when both earnings surprises and EARs are positive, and takes a short position in growth stocks when both earnings surprises and EARs are negative. The investor is long (or short) on stocks starting from the second day after the current quarter’s earnings announcement day and ending on the 2nd day before the next quarter’s earnings announcement. The portfolio is rebalanced quarterly, and the stocks are weighted equally.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.

