In theory, the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) posits an upward-sloping security market line (SML). That is, differences in expected returns are compensations for different degrees of systematic risk (i.e., market beta). However, for decades, the empirical evidence has proven more complicated than the theoretical projection: Market beta is “unpriced” at the firm level, reflecting a typical “flattened” SML in the US. At the portfolio level, low-beta stocks tend to outperform their high-beta counterparts on a risk-adjusted basis, leading to the so-called low-beta anomaly (betting against beta).
This paper examines the low-beta anomaly in the context of the Chinese stock market, the largest emerging financial market in the world. The paper shed new light on the CAPM model in China, the cornerstone of asset pricing. Estimating the (empirical) shape of the SML is not only crucial to our understanding of the finance theory but also serves many practical purposes such as evaluating the cost of equity capital of a firm and developing investment strategies.
Authors document a striking “downward-sloping” SML in China, which is more puzzling than the typical “flattened” SML in the US. The low-beta stocks outperform high-beta stocks on an absolute basis. The betting against beta (BAB) strategy is more profitable in China than in the US. Moreover, given the nature of an inverted SML, the BAB strategy is highly exploitable even for the most leverage-constrained investors in China.
The downward-sloping SML in China cannot be easily explained by existing theories of the low-beta anomaly that generally resorts to a certain type of market constraints (i.e., margin or leverage constraints). The paper shows that investor overconfidence offers some promises in reconciling the downward-sloping SML in China.

Fundamental reason
The Chinese stock market is well-known for its speculative nature, with a massive amount of young and inexperienced retail investors. These individual investors contribute more than 80% of the total trading volume. Given their strong market power, a natural conjecture is that various pricing and bias anomalies such as overconfidence exist in China. The investor overconfidence, manifested by excessive trading, provide a natural explanation for the betting against the beta effect. Intuitively, overconfidence may cause investors to underestimate risks and result in a higher-than-normal demand for speculative assets, especially for high-risk firms. Besides, there are also good reasons to believe that investor overconfidence is a key feature in the context of emerging markets. Firstly, these markets are typically dominated by unsophisticated individual investors who tend to be too confident about their private information or trading skills. Second, there are strong policy uncertainties caused by the regulatory body in emerging markets, and such uncertainties tend to be underestimated by individual investors.
This paper provides consistent evidence that investor overconfidence is able to resolve the negative slope of the SML observed in China, complementing the existing explanations for the beta anomaly. The slope of the SML becomes more “inverted” subsequent to increased overconfidence after accounting for other possible economic mechanisms. Moreover, a dynamic overconfidence effect as investor overconfidence is amplified by self-attribution bias. The SML gets more inverted when investors become more overconfident due to biased self-attribution (i.e., proxied by prior market performance).
Furthermore, the low-beta anomaly in China is fully captured by the stock turnover ratio: High-beta stocks are the most heavily traded stocks with the lowest risk-adjust returns. Both at the firm-level and the portfolio level, there is no longer a low-beta anomaly after controlling for the volume effect (i.e., turnover ratio).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese A-shares. The BAB portfolio is constructed in three steps. First, all stocks are ranked in ascending orders by their ex-ante market beta based on a rolling window of the prior five-year daily data. All stocks with a beta value below (above) the cross-sectional median are assigned to the low (high) beta portfolios. Second, the portfolio weights of the composite stocks are determined by their rankings of beta: Relatively lower (higher) beta stocks in the low (high) beta portfolio are given higher (lower) portfolio weights. Third, using the beta-parity approach, both the low beta portfolio (i.e., the long-leg) and the high beta portfolio (i.e., the short-leg) are rescaled to produce an ex-ante unit portfolio beta at the portfolio formation. That is, the long leg (short leg) is scaled up (down) by leveraging (deleveraging) its position. The BAB strategy takes a leveraged long position in low-beta stocks and a deleveraged short position in high-beta stocks. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly and rank-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It is a long-short equity strategy. Therefore, we cannot consider this strategy as a hedge to the equity market.