Some time ago, we presented a trading strategy #309, that stemmed from the firms´ parent-subsidiary relationship. In the respective academic paper, the authors investigated the predictive relations between stock returns of US parent and subsidiary companies and they have found, that past returns of the subsidiary (parent) company predict the future returns of the parent (subsidiary) company.
Now, the paper from Angelica Gonzalez et al. (2020) expands this research across 23 developed markets, but more importantly, their research is not focused only on the vertical parent-subsidiary relationships, it also investigates the horizontal return predictability between two parent companies, who both have at least 20% stake in the same subsidiary company. The proposed trading strategy at first ranks the parent firms each month according to the past month return of a portfolio, built of stocks of every sister parent company. (a company that has the same subsidiary as the focal company). Once the ranking is established, the investor goes long on top and short on the bottom quintile of respective firms’ stocks. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly. Following this strategy, an investor would earn an annual return of 13,08% from 2006 to 2018.
Further findings show that the results are not by customer-supplier relations, or industry or cross-country return momentum. Also, the ownership-linked firms showed predictability not only for stock returns, ownership-linked but also for their fundamental performance metrics.

Fundamental reason
The study has considered five different mechanisms, that could explain this effect: investors’ inattention, limits to arbitrage, commonality in decision making, ownership complexity and active internal capital markets. The tests have revealed that the active internal capital markets had a dominant role in return predictability among ownership-linked firms, while the ownership complexity also drove the results to a certain extent.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of parent firms stocks across 23 developed markets (Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, US). The stocks with prices below $5 are excluded, as well as firms from the financial sector. Price, volume, and return data for US firms are collected from CRSP and for non-US firms from Refinitiv Eikon. A company is considered as a parent once it has at least 20% stake in a subsidiary.
Each month, the parent firms are ranked based on the past month value-weighted return of a portfolio, built of stocks of every sister parent company. The investor then goes long on top and short on the bottom quintile of respective firms’ stocks. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide any information about hedging properties.