Over the past two decades, the Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) have become a very popular trading instrument. According to Robin Wigglesworth (2017), ETF trades represent 30% of all trading volume on US markets, compared to less than 2% in 2000. What is more, 7 of the 10 most traded securities in 2016 were ETFs. The main advantage for an ETF investor is that with buying an ETF, he buys a diversified pool of stocks, so he does not have to perform analyzes to pick the right stocks and regularly rebalance his portfolio. However, when buying or selling ETF, the investor often becomes blind to information about particular stocks included in the ETF, which is supported by the study from Cahan, Bai, and Yang (2018). This brings an opportunity for other market participants: stock pickers.

Thanks to the ignorance of information on a particular asset level, the correlations among ETFs constituents increase significantly when the ETF is traded heavily around a theme. This causes an effect, that even if the stock has a little exposure to the theme itself, its price changes in certain correlation with other ETF constituents. These changes could lead to significant mispricing in the price of an asset, which leads to investing opportunity. The research from Hailey Lynch et al. (2019) tries to exploit this effect by designing a simple trading strategy, that buys oversold stocks with the lowest beta to ETF when the ETF sells of in high-volume.

As an illustration, the Health Care Select Sector SPDR ETF (XLV) plummeted by –10.7% on the 99-percentile volume between 18th and 28th September 2015. This sell-off was driven mainly by the tweet of Hilary Clinton, stating that she would unveil a plan to curtail “price gouging” by pharmaceutical companies. Secondly, the Democrats in the US House of Representatives asked to subpoena Valeant Pharmaceuticals for documents on drug price increases. Without ETFs, the rational expectation is that these events would only influence the value of pharmaceutical companies. However, with ETF present, veterinary medicine and medical equipment companies were also hit. These kinds of stocks, which should not be affected, can be easily identified, as they usually have the lowest beta to the ETF. In this particular case, selecting a 10% of stocks with the lowest beta to the ETF represent a group of companies, that sell dental equipment, pet supplies and lab test. All these companies have been “accidentally“ hit by bad news from the pharmaceutical sector. Buying the stocks of these companies, an equal-weighted portfolio would outperform the XLV by 4.2% over the next 40 days.

The presented strategy does not require any special stock-picking skills. The only skill required is the ability to measure stocks beta. Therefore the researches propose, that the positive results behind their strategy may only outline the potential in the presented anomaly. After performing a more in-depth fundamental analysis, the returns could be more significant.

Fundamental reason
The main reason behind distortions and reversals is that some ETF constituents aren’t exposed to exogenous shocks in the same way or to the same extent as their peers. The study presents these stocks as “outsiders” and admits that they can change according to the nature of the shock. These shocks could vary from a drop in commodities prices, negative earnings surprises to earlier mentioned political statements. Ultimately, the more different constituents are from one another, the more opportunities there are for distortions.

Simple trading strategy
The investing universe consists of stocks from 9 sector ETFs, the S&P 500 ETF and a small-cap ETF. The first step is to identify a volume spike on the ETF. The volume spike is considered a day when the volume is at least three standard deviations away from its mean. For each volume spike accompanied by a negative return, the investor creates an equally-weighted portfolio of 10% ETF constituents, which have the lowest beta to the ETF. The investor buys these stocks and holds them for 40 days. The portfolio is equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only therefore it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).