Researchers present paper of Chinese equivalent of well-known phenomenon in Western markets called (Gregorian or solar) January effect. Specific of this application for Chinese markets is also (lunar) turn-of-the-year/New Year effect which concludes with rising trading volumes after the year end. Both are rich examples of seasonality in financial markets and researched concepts of calendar anomalies. Lunar January spans from late January to middle March in the solar calendar. According to the authors, on primary Chinese market there is compelling evidence for a strong lunar January effect, with returns much higher than those in solar January whereas other lunar monthly effects in the Chinese stock market are ranging from significantly smaller to virtually non-existent scales. The size effect states that equal-weighted returns are often larger than the corresponding value-weighted ones, and this is confirmed during aforementioned period by scientists too. However, due to high transaction costs, this specific of strategy is way harder to execute, and we omit this finding from construction of our proposed portfolio construction.

Fundamental reason
Previous studies on this topic are not as comprehensive and as thoughtful as this one. Xiaobo Liang, Qianqiu Liu, and Allan A. Zebedee (September 2022) contributed by carefully examining so called ‘lunar monthly effect’ which appears to be present, and which is colloquially quite incorrectly called solar February and March effect because Lunar January does not often start exactly at the start of solar month. Tax-loss selling or window dressing hypotheses were found not to explain the effect in Chinese markets, which are usually accepted by academia for western markets. Most significance is thus laid on turn-of-the-year effect in trading volumes combined with buy proportions, and daily returns, which are especially present on smaller listed companies. Additionally, two big macroeconomic events during those dates: the National People’s Congress and the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference (LIANGHUI) have positive impacts on stocks’ performance. Researchers undergo strict robustness tests and proved same kind of exact phenomenon is ranging from not present to weak on B-share market shares, which are available to foreigners.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese A-share market stocks. Investors are going long on six market indices including the whole A-share market on start of Chinese Lunar January. Portfolio is value-weighted and not being re-balanced since we trade strategy once yearly, investor buys stocks at the beginning of Lunar January and sells on end of the lunar month (so after 28 days).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No -