(Deng, Luo, Tong, Jan. 2024) brings us valuable insights about the profitability premium, which is significantly higher among high-markup firms than among low-markup firms. The profitability of a long-short double sort of i. profit markup and ii. revenue (long high profitability, high markup firms, and short of low profitability, low mark-up firms) strategy earns an average monthly return of 0.57% among high-markup firms and only 0.05% among low-markup firms, and we are happy to include it in our rich database of diverse and broad trading and investing approaches.

Fundamental reason
The paper introduces market power into a standard neoclassical investment-based model to understand the empirical findings. The economic intuition is that profitable firms with high market power benefit even less from positive technology shocks than those with low market power. Thus, market power exacerbates the displacement risk faced by profitable firms. The model’s novel empirical predictions for the investment responses to IST shocks are further supported in the data. However, exposing the strategy to investment-specific technology (IST) shocks among firms with high market power makes this strategy riskier and thus capable of earning a higher risk premium. All these findings suggest that market power significantly impacts profitable firms’ risk and return and potentially drives the profitability premium.

Simple trading strategy
The sample includes NYSE-, AMEX-, and Nasdaq-listed firm securities with share codes 10 and 11 (firms with ordinary common equity).
(Take monthly stock returns from CRSP and annual accounting data from Compustat. The data for the three factors of Fama French are from Kenneth French’s website.)

L and H stand for the low and high profitability portfolio, respectively. H − L stands for the high-minus-low profitability portfolio. Diff H − L stands for the difference in the H − L between high and low markup firms. Markup is calculated as profit margin (also known as price-cost margin) which is defined as total revenue (REVT) minus cost of goods sold (COGS) divided by total revenue.

Portfolios are independently sorted based on firm-level markup and gross profitability:
1. In June of each year t, stocks are sorted into three groups based on the tercile of the ranked markup values in year t − 1. Then;
2. independently, stocks are sorted into five groups based on the quintile of the ranked values of gross profitability in year t − 1.
3. As for execution, perform H − L (high-minus-low) long-short (top and bottom quintiles) spread portfolio.

The portfolios are rebalanced in June of each year. [Monthly returns on the resulting (fifteen) portfolios are then calculated from July of year t to June of year t + 1.] Portfolios themselves are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Unfortunately, the authors do not discuss the strategy’s suitability in financial market downturns, especially stock ones.