Past research has documented attractive returns, especially risk-adjusted, of option writing strategies. The writing of both put and call options has frequently been used as an adjunct to portfolio management. Buyers of the options use them either for protection or to leverage a portfolio’s return. Therefore options selling has been analogized to the provision of casualty insurance. Sellers do so to capture volatility risk premium, which reflects the compensation that investors earn for providing insurance against market losses. Option prices reflect this volatility premium because of market participants’ tendency to overestimate the probability of significant losses, and an investor can capture this premium by selling options.
Moreover, novel research has found out that one can considerably improve the returns of the aforementioned strategy by deploying these strategies only during periods when anticipated volatility is higher than usual, where the VIX index measures the anticipated volatility. The authors have shown that the difference between implied volatility and realized volatility varies across various VIX regimes (implied volatility is based on the market’s forecasts of future volatilities extracted from the prices of options written on the asset of interest). The difference between the implied and realized volatility is particularly raised when the VIX index is elevated. Thus, a strategy of selling options during high VIX regimes is expected to yield superior returns. This leads to a conditional option writing strategy of staying fully invested in the market when the VIX is relatively low and writing calls or puts when VIX is high. According to the research, this trading strategy produces higher returns, lower volatility and downside risk than the market during the period 1995 through June 2018. Additionally, this conditional option writing strategy also performs better than the returns of unconditional option writing.

Fundamental reason
The economic intuition for the results stems from the observed differences in volatility risk premium in different market environments. The difference between implied volatility and realized volatility varies across VIX regimes. VIX understates forward volatility in the lower quartiles and overstates in the upper quartiles. Moreover, these differences between VIX and forward volatility in each of these quartiles are statistically significant. Option writing is then recommended as an optional strategy to take advantage of the possibility that people overpay for protection. To sum it up, the performance of the strategy could be attributed to the costly insurance during the elevated VIX periods. Otherwise, the strategy utilizes positive S&P returns and low volatility environments by holding the S&P 500 ETF. Therefore, in all cases, conditional strategies have smaller losses than the S&P alone. Last but not least, Monte Carlo analysis shows that the results of the paper results are robust across various time periods. What denies the hypothesis that observed outperformance could be an artefact of the particular time period that authors have analyzed.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of either S&P 500 options (put-writing ETF can be bought instead of directly selling options) or index itself. The strategy is simple if the median VIX level in the prior month is higher than the historical median VIX value enter the option selling strategy – put write options (the manager sells put options while holding a portfolio of U.S. Treasury Bills to ensure that the writer can fulfil his contract obligation should the put buyer exercise the option). On the other hand, if the median VIX is lower than the median value, stay in the S&P 500. This same evaluation is made in each subsequent month by looking at the full VIX history to up through the prior month to compute the historical VIX median and compare the median VIX level of the prior month to the historical median. The strategy is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only. Therefore it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).
