Momentum strategies are well-recognized by both academics and practitioners. Although this anomaly is probably the most researched, there are still new papers with novel ideas. There is plenty of literature that examines the lookback periods or the main talking point of momentum strategies. Past research identifies long or short momentum factors, where the long momentum is usually 12-months momentum, and 1-month momentum is the short one. Another branch of literature builds on this and examines the lookback periods more dynamically. Their aim is to find more optimal lookback periods either by a more traditional “time-series” approach or a modern approach using machine learning methods. However, there still is a problem with turning points of momentum strategies. Longer lookback period leads to a slow momentum strategy because the strategy cannot be reactive enough and can signal a long position when the market is already falling.
On the other hand, fast or short momentum can be reactive too much and provide false positives. The aforementioned is the main problem of such strategies. To be more precise, if slow and fast signals are the same, there is either bull or bear market, and positions of momentum strategy are clear. However, the situation when the signals do not agree, needs attention. When slow and fast momentums disagree, the paper calls it a “Correction” state if slow momentum indicates a long position and fast momentum indicates a short position.
On the other hand, if slow momentum indicates a short position and fast momentum indicates a long position, it is called a “Rebound” state. The novel idea of the paper is to mix the signals in the search for better performance. According to the paper, there are two options. The first one is static where the signals are weighted using a constant, while the second approach uses a dynamical approach that finds optimal weights for the slow and fast signals. We will present the more complicated but also, the better dynamical approach.

Fundamental reason
Paper recognizes four market cycles, namely: Bull, Correction, Bear, and Rebound. Cycles are implied by the agreement or disagreement between slow and fast momentum indicators. When slow and fast momentums disagree, the paper calls it a “Correction” state if slow momentum indicates a long position and fast momentum indicates a short position. On the other hand, if slow momentum indicates a short position and fast momentum indicates a long position, it is called a “Rebound” state. According to the paper, the best practice is to blend the slow and fast momentum signals to enhance the profits of the portfolio. However, the blending should not be constant during Correction and Rebound states. A dynamic approach that finds the blending constant in each cycle which maximizes the Sharpe ratio outperforms a simple static approach of choosing some constant blending factor. Blended strategies are connected with many advantages over both slow or fast strategies; higher Sharpe ratios, less severe drawdowns, more positive skewness, the higher significance of alphas and stronger predictability of many moments of returns. Lastly, when momentum signals are in agreement (Bull or Bear states), there are positive and negative economic surprises. On the other hand, during market states of Corrections and Rebounds, innovations are insignificant, suggesting a potential shift or stall in the macro-environment as well as in the stock market. Therefore, the research concludes that momentum strategies that vary with market cycles or to be more precise, the dynamic-speed strategy, have the potential to be more eﬀective than more traditional and simple approaches.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. excess value-weighted factor (Mkt-RF) from the Kenneth French Data Library or in other words, all CRSP firms incorporated in the U.S. and listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ that have a CRSP share code of 10 or 11. Firstly, consider a fast 1-month momentum signal and slow 12-month momentum signal. The signals are blended by the variable alpha such as 1 minus alpha times slow signal plus alpha times fast signal. The variable alpha is state-dependent. If the market`s state is bear or bull – the alpha is not important since the signals agree and it could be set at one half. However, the alpha is dependent on the Correction or Rebound state. For example, if the market is at Correction state at time t, the correction state alpha is used for the blending at time t+1 and so on. The state-dependent alphas are found by the maximization of the Sharpe ratio in the subsequent month. The solutions for both Correction and Rebound state`s alphas are given by equations 22 and 23. These solutions are theoretically correct; however, for the practical application, there is a need to use historical estimates (using sample averages) for the expected values and probabilities. The strategy is rebalanced monthly. Lastly, we present a strategy that is estimated based on 77,5 years and averages of state-dependent alpha are used in a trading strategy for 15 years.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only; therefore, it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as most of the strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very high).