Previous academic research has uncovered the predictive power of options‘ skewness on future stock returns. The finding was based on the assumption that information is likely to be reflected in options prices with a certain advance compared to stock prices. A recent academic paper complements this finding. This time, the research focused on the predictive ability of option-implied volatility convexity (serving as a proxy for option-implied excess kurtosis), which, as found by the authors, has a negative predictive relationship with future stock returns. The quintile portfolio with the lowest IV convexity outperformed the quintile portfolio with the highest IV convexity by more than one percentage point per month. The result remains statistically significant after controlling for systematic risks and option-implied volatility slope and is persistent for up to six months.

Fundamental reason
It is assumed that informed traders can exploit their information advantage better on equity options markets than on stock markets as such. It is due to a number of advantages associated with options trading, especially lower trading costs, greater leverage effects, and the lack of restrictions on short selling. Therefore, it is likely that option prices contain certain information before it is reflected in stock prices. In this case, such option investors, who anticipate excess tail risk on a particular stock, induce a leptokurtic implied distribution of stock returns, which can then serve as an indicator of the stocks’ low future performance. That is where the negative relationship comes from – higher excess kurtosis proxied by IV convexity predicts lower future stock returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed at NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ with liquid options, whose implied volatility data are available at OptionMetrics database. The investor uses following formula to calculate the estimated measure of IV convexity for each option: IV convexity = IVput(Δ = -0.2) + IVput(Δ = -0.8) − 2 x IVcall(Δ = 0.5), where Δ = delta. On the last trading day of each month, the investor sorts the stocks into quintiles (Q1 − Q5) based on IV convexity for the relevant option. Then the investor goes long on the quintile with the lowest IV convexity (portfolio Q1) and short on the quintile with the highest IV convexity (portfolio Q5). The stocks in the portfolios are value-weighted. The portfolios are rebalanced monthly and held for one month as well.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.

