What will happen to stock during the night after it fell awfully during a market session? Similarly, what will happen to stock during the day if it fell awfully during the night and opened with a big price gap? Academic research suggests that there is a short-term price reversal after the sharp price decline. This outstanding financial research paper also shows that this behavior could be exploited profitably. Several different versions of this simple idea are presented in the research paper, and they are tested on several equity universes (large, mid, small-cap). We picked one version which probably has the easiest execution – the model strategy is executed in the S&P 500 universe and would buy the worst-performing shares from the open-to-close period and will hold them until the next open. The strategy’s performance could be improved by using a less liquid (and harder to execute) universe like small-cap stocks. Or it could be enhanced by simultaneously using both strategies’ versions – nightly holding period and daily holding period. However, the strategy’s performance has to be closely monitored in the future as profits slowly erode (but are still above-average). This eroding could probably be stopped by using a shorter holding period.

Fundamental reason
Contrarian strategies benefit from the overreaction to an isolated event. This overreaction results in a trend reversal and contrarian signs of return after the event, as opposed to during the event itself. The existence of contrarian profits can be partly explained by the overreaction hypothesis – the original extreme move is caused by the investors’ overreaction to firm-specific news.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks from the S&P 500 index. The strategy buys the N ( 50 stocks in the first decile) worst performing shares from the open-to-close period (decision period). These shares are bought when the market closes, and they are held until the next day’s market open. They are subsequently sold for the opening price. Shares are equally weighted in the portfolio.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The source research paper doesn’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. Equity reversal strategies usually type of “liquidity providing” strategies, and as such, they usually perform well during market crises. However, reversal strategies are also naturally a “short volatility” strategy; their returns increase mainly in the weeks following large stock market declines. Traders must be cautious during crises during days with high volatility as reversal strategies usually force traders to buy stocks which performed especially bad (and to sell short stocks with an extremely positive short term performance). This position is emotionally hard to open, and risk management of reversal strategies must also be very strict during these days. We recommend reading the research paper by Nagel: “Evaporating Liquidity” to gain insight into the behavior of reversal strategies during crises.