We live in an information-rich world. Compared to the past, there is probably an overwhelming amount of new information each day that investor cannot even process. Therefore, investors and traders need to   “pick” their source of news. Additionally, journalists and editors need to decide which topic they would focus on. The novel research shows that even if we centre our attention around the 500 largest stocks in the US market, they do not receive the same attention. Some stocks tend to receive more attention from editors compared to others.
Using natural language processing and the articles from the prominent New York Times, the paper shows that the preference for firms’ characteristics is largely time-varying, and the editors continuously decide which topics would they cover and which not. With the regression model’s help, the author estimates the time-varying preference and, most importantly, shows the possible usage of this metric in practice. According to the results, the choice of editors has an added value for investors since the high preference firms outperform the low preference firms. Additionally, the effect is more substantial among covered stocks compared to the non-covered stocks. Therefore, these results lead to a strategy that consists of going long frequently covered high preference stocks and going short non-covered, low preference stocks.

Fundamental reason
According to the previous research, if articles featured in the news for one type of firms over others are prevalent, it is a signal that the type is riskier than the rest. The reason is that the more risky firms are more attractive to be featured in the news. Additionally, suppose investors believe that the same signal is available also to the other investors. In that case, they tend to react, and the assets are affected even if the fundamentals did not change yet. It is natural to expect that the signal is broadly available since the strategy is based on articles featured in the New York Times. Therefore, it could be said that the author links the outperformance to a requirement of a bigger compensation for holding the riskier stocks. As previously mentioned, editors’ preference is time-varying, which is caused by monitoring different attributes of companies with a continuous and timely adjusted focus.
Moreover, the strategy has a significant alpha of the model consisting of three Fama French factors, betting-against-beta and momentum factor. Therefore, the common risk factors cannot explain the performance.

Simple trading strategy
Each month, the investment universe consists of the 500 largest firms (sorted by the market value) in the Compustat/CRSP database. The news data are obtained from the New York Times’ API. Articles are filtered to those from the “Business” and “Business Day” sections, and any company announcements are omitted. Firstly, for each article, to find the number of mentions, the paper utilizes the identification methodology of Schenkler and Zheng (2019) – NLP toolkit of Manning et al. (2014) and coreNLP of Arnold (2017). Secondly, the coverage of each firm i at month t is defined as the natural logarithm of one plus the number of mentions during month t. Nextly, for each stock, estimate the state-dependent preference of editors using a regression model. The dependent variable is the coverage for each firm, and independent variables include logarithm of size (market value), fixed effect, which controls for whether a firm i is ever covered in the most recent three months and its GIC industry sector and finally, eight features that should be correlated with the media coverage: cumulative return in past three months, the absolute value of cumulative return, idiosyncratic volatility, book-to-market ratio and factor loadings of the Carhart’s 4-factor model. Finally, identify each stock’s time-varying editor’s preference (EP) as the sum of each feature multiplied by its corresponding beta. Nextly, each month, split stocks into covered firms (firms that were mentioned in the month t) and non-covered firms. In each split, sort stocks based on the EP into the highest 30% percentile and the lowest 30% percentile. Long the high percentile among covered firms and short the low percentile among non-covered firms. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy has significant and positive (0.2998) beta to the Market factor