Several academics and traders have noticed in the past couple years that US stocks had significantly higher return during night session compared to the daily session (see #4 – Overnight Anomaly). The simple strategy of holding stocks (via ETF for example) during the night and selling it always at open seems profitable before trading costs and slippage. However, the application of fees and slippage could make this strategy unprofitable. Recent academic research proposes very useful improvement – investor doesn’t trade the whole index (all stocks) but executes overnight trading only on a subset of stocks with the highest probability of positive (or negative) drift. Research shows that past overnight performance of stocks could be used as a predictor of overnight performance in the future. The improved long-short overnight strategy seems to be profitable even after transactions costs and offers attractive risk-return characteristics.

Fundamental reason
The academic paper states that from a statistical perspective, the continuation of “overnight momentum” profits over several years can be attributed in part to cross-sectional variations in the means of the overnight return processes. In other words, stocks with higher expected overnight returns are more likely to be in the top overnight decile portfolio and more likely to have superior overnight performance in the next period. As Conrad and Kaul (1998) point out, this explanation can generate momentum-type profits even with a random walk model. While cross-sectional variations in expected returns are usually linked with characteristics priced by the market, such as risk, overnight and intraday return presents an unusual situation since they have opposite relationships with factors such as risk. The strong negative relationship between the means of the overnight and intraday return processes suggests that they are distorted by offsetting biases.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks from NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq. Each year investor picks stocks which are the most susceptible to have elevated returns during the overnight session. These stocks could be picked by simple approach (investor sorts all stocks by their nightly performance during the previous year and picks the best performing decile) or by using regression model stated on page 19 (equation number 8, linear regression model in which daily log overnight returns are regressed on daily log total returns, investor sorts stocks into four groups based on their susceptibility to having elevated/depressed overnight returns). Each day at the close, the investor buys stocks which are in a group of significant night performers and short stocks from a group of significant night laggards. A long-short portfolio is held overnight and is liquidated at open. Stocks are weighted equally.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. For short-only performance, see source academic paper, data from table 5 for the short portfolio with $10,000 transaction per stock.