Commodity prices are a risk factor that directly influences inflation for consumers as well as input and output prices for firms. Therefore, stocks should be sensitive to this factor (which may be interpreted as a commodity risk premium or as a hedging premium for inflation risk). Research shows that stocks that are less sensitive to commodity prices (measured by their beta with respect to a broad commodity index) outperformed their peers in the past, which are more sensitive. This effect changed direction (less sensitive stocks lag behind their more sensitive peers) after the year 2003 when investors started to hedge on commodity markets. A long-short equity portfolio could, therefore, be created to exploit this commodity factor. A commodity risk premium is stronger for big stocks than for small stocks, which makes this effect more practicable than some other anomalies which work well mainly on small and illiquid stocks.

Fundamental reason
Contemporaneous and lagged commodity returns predict elements of inflation, which is relevant for asset pricing (mainly unexpected inflation and changes in expected inflation). The commodity risk premium is likely to be a hedging premium for inflation risk. Investors are willing to pay higher prices (accept lower expected returns) for high commodity beta stocks because these stocks pay off in the face of unexpected inflation and unfavorable changes in expected inflation. This effect is reversed in a simple model in which investors are exposed to exogenous inflation risk, and they switch from hedging in the stock market to hedging directly in the commodity market (which has been happening since 2003). This leads to the observed reversal in the risk premium.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the biggest 20% of stocks from NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ (based on market-cap). Thirty-three liquidly traded commodities are weighted based on their Total Open Interest (TOI), and an OIW (Open Interest Weighted) commodity index is created. Commodity betas for all stocks from the investment universe over a 60-month rolling window are then estimated using a regression equation. The investor then goes long on the 20% of stocks with the highest commodity beta and short on the 20% of stocks with the lowest beta. The portfolio is value-weighted and is rebalanced every month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of the market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.