Informed trading is an event-driven opportunistic strategy based on some additional information not easily accessible by the market or only accessible by insiders. In this study, alternative data is used to create a custom measure of informed trading that outperforms traditional signals of informed traders. Typically, conventional data such as bid-ask spreads are used to model informed trading but with limited efficacy. By extracting numeric data in the form of transactions from the Schedule 13D filings typically filed by activist investors and investors that are obtaining a stake larger than 5% in a company, the authors devise a data-driven method to construct a predictor. As coined by the authors, the Informed Trading Intensity indicator is better at predicting the class of informed trades compared to the benchmarks established in the literature, based on cross-validation out of sample test. Thus, the indicator can be used to expand the information set of an investor without the primary signal by creating a proxy. The main advantage of using an ML approach in contrast to the linear methods is that it allows for a more flexible specification of the interaction terms and nonlinearities. These could be tackled using basis functions; however, a well-tuned ML model can discover them naturally and therefore require less calibration to predict the target variable. The authors evaluate several classes of ML models, and they conclude that an Ensemble Tree method Random Forest is the most suitable. They choose to implement the Gradient Boosted XGBoost, which adds the boosting part to the bagged trees.

Fundamental reason
A strategy formed on the Informed Trading Intensity indicator identifies a potentially mispriced stock by attributing a probability-like measure on a significant price action potentially caused by the repricing event itself. These events are often specific to the stock, such as an over or under reaction to an earnings surprise or an M&A deal announcement known only to insiders prior to its release or other miscellaneous events that are part of the idiosyncratic risks. Training a model that uses a training set mimicking the publicly available information set is useful because it can be trained to identify these events, and hence it can be used to predict them without the trader having the information about the event itself. The authors prove that these results are robust and orthogonal to signals such as new about earnings announcements and M&A announcements, and therefore, there is additional statistically significant information in the ITI prior to the actual release of the information.

Simple trading strategy
Data on Schedule 13D transactions with transaction size, type (buy or sell), date and other identification fields are collected in the sample spanned from 1993 to 2019. Additionally, data on M&A announcements and short interest are collected from Thomson Reuters and Markit. ML training information set is constructed from several databases featuring Volume, Volatility, Liquidity and Return variables with the complete list found in Appendix A. A target training sample using the 60-day window of the insider trades and sizes prior to the filing of Schedule 13D filings is used and trained on the standardized features described above. The model is five-fold cross-validated into non-overlapping parts in time and then tested on the entire cross-section of stocks producing a daily Informed Trading Intensity (ITI) for each security. A long-short decile spread is formed based on the average ITI in the prior week, and an equally weighted portfolio is constructed for the next month, after which the strategy rebalances according to the ITI sorts.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Regression analysis on the Fama-French factors yields a slightly negative statistically significant market beta suggesting that the signals provided by the model are orthogonal and can provide a hedge on average. However, the beta can change during times of elevated market stress and volatility. Further event study would need to be employed on the returns to assess the robustness of this potential hedge.