Complementarity as a type of inter-firm linkage stems from supplying an overlapping set of customers. Present study of Lee et al. (2022) extends prior production complementarity related studies, and documents its capital market implications. It demonstrates strong linkage between complementors (entities sharing some production complementarities) that do not belong to the same industry, are not covered by the same analysts, and do not have direct customer-supplier relationship to each other. Authors develop a measure capturing production complementarity distance between firms (COMPL), i.e the degree to which the outputs of two companies are subsequently used as complementary inputs in the same production process. Firstly, they find that firms with high complementarity move together in terms of fundamentals and stock returns. Secondly, they discover a predictable lag of lead firm’s stock returns in relation to stock returns of its complementor peers. In other words, higher (lower) returns of peers predict higher (lower) returns of focal firm itself at later times. Authors call this phenomenon “complementor momentum”. The results are robust to an extensive set of control variables and seem to be driven by mispricing rather than risk. From a global perspective, complementary network helps transmit shocks across the economy. If any shock affects one entity in such network, other entities belonging to the same network will be affected in the same direction.

Fundamental reason
Sluggish price response of focal firms or the momentum spillover effect is mainly driven by investors’ limited attention. More specifically, it is their inattention to fundamental news of production complementary firms and slow responses to value relevant information among complementors. Such delayed information recognition leads to patterns of return predictability that are difficult to explain by traditional asset pricing models. Intuitively, subjects to lower attention are especially smaller firms, firms with lower analyst coverage and lower institutional ownership. According to the authors, the lead-lag effect gets stronger with stronger economic linkage, meaning tighter relationship between the underlying economic fundamentals. Additionally, lagged response is more notable for focal firms with a higher number of complementors as their stocks are connected to many different stocks and it takes longer for the information to be incorporated. Finally, what seems to add to slow response is higher arbitrage risk.

Simple trading strategy
The final sample in the research paper consists of 844,926 firm-month observations covering the period from July 1978 to June 2018.

Data are sourced from Input-Output Surveys of the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Compustat Historical Industry Segment database and CRSP. COMPL score is defined as the cosine similarity of two firms’ output flow vectors at time t. Each element of these vectors represents the proportion of firm i sales used by industry n. Keep the top 2% of production complementor pairs for every year to prevent inclusion of weak correlated firms. Leave six-month gap between the fiscal-year end month and the portfolio formation date. Exclude stocks with price below one dollar per share at the beginning of the holding period. Sort all firms into deciles based on the return of their complementors in the prior month. Go long top 10% high complementor peers’ return stocks and short bottom 10% low complementors’ return stocks. Portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced at the beginning of each calendar month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -