As the Chinese economy and its stock market are opening to the global world, it provides novel opportunities for investors and attracts researchers’ attention. It is well established that there are several key differences between US and Chinese stocks markets. For example, the proportion of retail traders or the number of state-owned enterprises. Therefore, the well-known results from developed markets may not hold in the Chinese market. Despite its size (after all, it is the second-largest stock market), it is still developing. Thus the rich anomaly universe in the US market might not be present in China.
This novel research paper examines a variety of well-known anomalies in the Chinese A-shares market. Considering almost every popular investment style such as Value, Size, Quality, Risk, Past performance or Trading activity, the paper is a perfect insight into the applicability of the notoriously known strategies also in China. This screener’s addition is related to the strategies based on trading activity and describes the abnormal turnover anomaly. The reason is that looking at the value-weighted portfolios based on trading activity, only the abnormal turnover is largely significant in China. In general, the anomaly is related to the investor’s sentiment, which is a substantial factor in the presence of a high proportion of retail investors.

Fundamental reason
As it was previously mentioned, the Chinese A-shares market is dominated by retail investors. Previous researches have shown that these investors are primarily sentiment-driven. Since the abnormal turnover anomaly is a proxy for the investor’s sentiment, this creates a link with the proportion of retail investors. Hence, the strategy is probably working because of the retailer’s share in the market and their sentiment-driven decisions.
Furthermore, the authors provide some general results for all anomalies, considering the differences in the US market and whether those differences can be detrimental for the strategies. Firstly, the limits of arbitrage cannot explain the anomalies’ returns since the long and short returns are of similar magnitude. Secondly, also the great number of state-owned enterprises does not influence the functionality of strategies. Factor premiums seem to be present in both types of stocks. Lastly, the stock market reforms lowered the returns, but still, for numerous anomalies, the returns are significant.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed on RMB-denominated stocks listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) and Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE) (A-shares). The data is obtained from China Stock Market & Accounting Research (CSMAR) database. The microcaps (the bottom 30% of stocks) are omitted.
Firstly, for each stock, calculate the abnormal turnover using daily share turnovers that are equal to the number of shares traded divided by the total number of shares outstanding. Finally, the abnormal turnover is equal to the average daily share turnover over past 20 days divided by the average daily turnover over the past 250 days. Each month, stocks are sorted into deciles based on their abnormal turnover. Long the bottom decile and short the highest decile. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly and value-weighted.

 

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not offer any insight into the hedging properties of the strategy.