Matthew’s effect is widely recognized among several fields as a cumulated advantage or an exaggerated saying: the rich get richer, and the poor get poorer. Novel research by Papamichalis examines the Matthew effect and its implications in the stock market. According to the theory, lower entry costs cause a Matthew effect that shifts sources from low to high markup firms, and as a result, the low markup firms shrink while high markup firms expand. Consequently, the low markup firms offer higher returns to compensate for this risk. The paper also offers an interesting view on the size effect since the low markup firms have, on the average small size, and the size rises with markups. In the pre-1980 period, the Size effect was significant as well as the Matthew effect.
However, since 1980, the entry costs have been increasing, and entry rates decreasing, which according to the paper, leads to the Anti-Matthew effect, where high markups firms have a risk of losing resources to low markup firms. Therefore, the high markup firms should compensate with higher risk premia, and the size premium shrinks or even disappears. Based on these findings, the research paper examines a novel strategy that consists of buying high markups firms with large size and shorting low markup, low size firms.

Fundamental reason
The fundamental reason is based on the demand curves and elasticity. If the entry costs are decreasing, firms with elastic demand curves are affected more. On the other hand, if entry costs increase, firms with inelastic demand curves are negatively affected by the entry risk. If the competition decreases, the price index goes up, and the demand curve shifts up. Additionally, the decreasing competition reduces the output that subsequently shifts the demand curve to the left, resulting in a risk of inelastic high markup firms losing resources to low elastic low markup firms. As a result, the high markup firms should compensate for these risks with higher returns.
In the recent period, the entry costs are increasing, giving rise to the second effect that the paper describes as the Anti-Matthew effect. Therefore, the conditions in the market and the decreasing entry rates give rise to the Anti-Matthew effect and seem to be the main reason for the insignificant size effect (as already discussed in the introduction).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of CRSP stocks. Other data are obtained from WRDS, Compustat, and NIPA. The first step is to estimate the markups for each firm. For each firm, the markup is calculated as the sales divided by the cost of goods sold (output divided by the input), and the ratio is multiplied by the output elasticity of a variable input which needs to be estimated for each industry assuming the Cobb-Douglas specification (see equations 1 and 2). At first, sort stocks into quintiles based on the size measured as sales, and perform another sort based on the markups to obtain double-sorts. Long stocks in the largest size and markup quintile and short stocks in the smallest size and markup quintile. The strategy is rebalanced yearly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include any information regarding this topic.