As the Chinese economy and its stock market are opening to the global world, it provides novel opportunities for investors and attracts researchers’ attention. It is well established that there are several key differences between US and Chinese stocks markets. For example, the proportion of retail traders or the number of state-owned enterprises. Therefore, the well-known results from developed markets may not hold in the Chinese market. Despite its size (after all, it is the second-largest stock market), it is still developing. Thus the rich anomaly universe in the US market might not be present in China.
This novel research paper examines a variety of well-known anomalies in the Chinese A-shares market. Considering almost every popular investment style such as Value, Size, Quality, Risk, Past performance or Trading activity, the paper is a perfect insight into the applicability of the notoriously known strategies also in China. This screener’s addition is related to the risk style and describes the idiosyncratic volatility anomaly. In general, low-risk stocks tend to outperform high-risk stocks, and it seems that this theory also holds in the Chinese market.

Fundamental reason
The great share of retail investors in China is connected with speculation and probably also with irrationality. Thus, there is a significant preference for risky and lottery-like stocks. However, as the literature continuously prove, the greater risk is not always compensated with returns. On the contrary, academic research repeatedly proves that low-risk stocks outperform high-risk stocks. The most common explanation is that the low-risk stocks are undervalued compared to popular but overvalued risky stocks.
Furthermore, the authors provide some general results for all anomalies, considering the differences in the US market and whether those differences can be detrimental for the strategies. Firstly, the limits of arbitrage cannot explain the anomalies’ returns since the long and short returns are of similar magnitude. Secondly, also the great number of state-owned enterprises does not influence the functionality of strategies. Factor premiums seem to be present in both types of stocks. Lastly, the stock market reforms lowered the returns, but still, for numerous anomalies, the returns are significant.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed on RMB-denominated stocks listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) and Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE) (A-shares). The data is obtained from China Stock Market & Accounting Research (CSMAR) database. The microcaps (the bottom 30% of stocks) are omitted.
Firstly, compute the idiosyncratic volatility for each stock, which is defined as the standard deviation of residuals from a regression. The dependent variable is daily excess stock return, and explanatory variables include an intercept, value-weighted market factor, size factor and value factor. The regressions are estimated using the past 250 trading days. Each month, stocks are sorted into deciles based on their idiosyncratic volatility. Long the bottom decile (the least risky stocks) and short the highest decile (the riskiest stocks). The portfolio is rebalanced monthly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not offer any insight into the hedging properties of the strategy.