The length and remaining time of the investment horizon represent crucial factors that influence the investor´s risk tolerance. Once the investor founds himself in a later stage of his investment horizon, he becomes less risk-tolerant and seeks safer investments that are not severely impacted by significant market downturns. The issue of portfolio protection for risk-averse investors has been emphasized by the recent three great stock market crashes in the past two decades.
One of the most employed and popular strategies that significantly reduce the risk exposure is the Barbell strategy. This strategy describes a situation where the investor invests in more asset classes with different risk characteristics, while the majority of his portfolio holds relatively safe fixed income securities and the rest invests in highly risky assets.
One of such Barbell strategies has recently been discussed in the paper from William J. Trainor er al. (2020). In this study, the authors employ a Barbell strategy that invests 88% of the portfolio in 7-10 year Treasury securities and the rest 12% in long-dated in-the-money call options on the S&P 500 index. The described strategy has comparable characteristics with constant proportional portfolio insurance, while the Treasury holdings represent the strategy´s floor and the exposure to equities changes with the market performance.
The overall results of this barbell strategy are quite impressive. Even though the strategy underperformed the S&P 500 index in twelve of seventeen backtested years, it has been able to earn a geometric annual return of 8,62% from 12/2002 to 11/2019, which represents 90,67% of the S&P 500´s return. The most impressive part is that the strategy has been able to earn this return with a standard deviation of only 6,85%, compared to the 14,5 % standard dev. of the S&P 500 index.
Besides using call options for the S&P 500 index, the authors have also tested this strategy for investing in call options for other indices. On average, the strategies has been able to achieve 92% of an underlying assets geometrical annual return.

Fundamental reason
Treasury notes represent an asset that provides a low correlation to equities and protects the value well during significant market declines. Even though the Barbell strategies generally underperform the equities during bull markets, their value becomes obvious during the crisis. Thanks to the ability to avoid great losses, the investor does not have to take a long journey to recover. For example, when experiencing a 50% loss on an equity portfolio, the investor subsequently needs to gain 100% to break even. Loosing 15% with a Barbell strategy, the investor needs less than 20% gain to break even.
Additionally, we have internally compared the proposed Barbell strategy to the well-known 60/40 equities/bonds strategy, where 60% was invested in SPY and 40% in IEF. The Barbell strategy has delivered a comparable return, but the risk-adjusted performance and drawdowns were significantly more favourable.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the iShares 7-10 year Treasury Bond ETF and in-the-money call options on the S&P 500 index with 0,7 delta and at least one-year maturity when purchasing. Assign 88% of the portfolio´s weight to iShares 7-10 year Treasury Bond ETF and the rest 12% to the call options. The portfolio is rebalanced quarterly at the end of each February, May, August and November, while the holding period of purchased options is one year. This means that with each rebalancing, the worth of bought options equals 3% of the portfolio´s value.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy is designed to ease equity market downturns but does not erase them completely