John J. Shim (2020) argues that the use of ETFs to trade on factor information leads to arbitrage opportunities in the underlying constituent stocks and because the creation-redemption process makes an ETF and its underlying portfolio fungible, arbitrageurs trade to obtain the fungible unit and earn nearly riskless profits. In summary, price movements predicted by ETF arbitrage eventually correct but converge so over the course of over 2 months. More generally, ETF constituent stocks most (least) sensitive to arbitrage trading tend to commove more (less) with the market and have negative (positive) alphas.

Fundamental reason
Findings from the study suggest that arbitrage co-movement distorts prices and factor loadings. Since covariances are central to asset pricing, arbitrage co-movement affects how academics and practitioners understand fundamental exposures and assess risk since observed covariances pick up a significant non-fundamental, mechanical arbitrage component when ETF trading activity is high. As ETFs continue to be heavily utilized as trading and price discovery vehicles, they may improve price discovery at the level of aggregate factors, but since arbitrage mistranslates factor information, it could reduce market efficiency with respect to factor information at the individual security level.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of heavily traded U.S. equity ETFs (at least $100mm in average daily trading volume). The value-weighted portfolios are formed by sorting securities held by non-industry high-volume on arbitrage sensitivity, the estimate is calculated from equation (10) using intraday TAQ data and ETF holdings data. We can use data from ETF Global and Thomson Reuters s12 datasets for the aforementioned variables. Finally, we formulate a final long-short portfolio (H-L) that goes long (buys) the high arbitrage sensitivity portfolio and short (sells) the low sensitivity portfolio. It is assumed to be rebalanced monthly. Value-weights for constituents are based monthly on the past month’s market capitalization.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - In fact, as mentioned in our blog article, ETF Re-balancing and Hedge Fund Front-Running Trades, rebalancing, and usual arbitrage acts that take advantage of the predictable correlation between assets do not work as well during bear markets. It is not advisable, therefore, to perform strategies based on these fundamental drivers.