A considerable amount of academic papers discuss whether stock returns are predictable. In their seminal work, Welch and Goyal (2008) argue that despite their significant in-sample predictive ability, traditional predictors fail to predict future excess stock returns out-of-sample. A study by Fang (2020) contributes to the literature on stock return predictability by empirically investigating the predictive ability of a set of gold price ratios in-sample and out-of-sample. To this end, the paper constructs ten gold price ratios defined as the natural logarithm of the US dollar price of gold to the price of an individual asset. In-sample tests revealed that seven out of ten gold price ratios significantly and positively predict excess stock returns. Among these ratios, the gold-oil ratio (GO) appeared to be the most powerful return predictor, and its information does not overlap with the information contained in traditional predictors and other gold price ratios. A one standard deviation increase in GO is associated with a 6.6% increase in the annual excess stock return for the next month in-sample. The out-of-sample forecast evaluations demonstrated that gold price ratios have, on average higher values of the out-of-sample R-squared statistic than the traditional predictors of Welch and Goyal (2008), with GO still delivering the highest out-of-sample R-squared statistic. Naturally, investors can utilize the powerful predictive ability of the GO to increase (decrease) their stock exposure in periods when the predicted stock return is higher (lower).

Fundamental reason
The economic explanation for why the gold-oil ratio (GO) should predict future aggregate stock returns is twofold. First, the valuation models demonstrate that asset prices should equal expected discounted cash flows, which indicates that asset prices are determined by both future expected cash flows and discount rates (Cochrane, 2011). Accordingly, the predictive ability of GO to forecast aggregate returns may come from either the cash flow channel, the discount rate channel or both. Stock return decomposition via the vector autoregressive (VAR) framework of Campbell (1991) and Campbell and Ammer (1993) has revealed that the predictive ability of GO mainly originates from GO’s anticipation of aggregate cash flow news. Second, GO has proven to be a powerful predictor of economic variables. Specifically, GO negatively and significantly predicts the default spread, financial stress, and macro and financial uncertainty. Therefore, a higher GO indicates better economic conditions.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the S&P 500 index and the one-month Treasury bill. First, construct the gold-oil price ratio (GO) predictor by dividing the price of gold by the oil price and taking the natural logarithm of this ratio. Second, using the initial sample of the latest 240 monthly observations, regress the log return of the S&P 500 index, including dividends in excess of the one-month Treasury bill rate in month t+1 (dependant variable) on the GO in month t (independent variable). Third, at the end of month t, use the estimated regression model to forecast excess return for the S&P 500 in the month t+1. Fourth, at the end of the month t, compute the optimal portfolio allocation to the S&P 500 index during month t+1 as S&P 500 allocation = (1 / risk-aversion coefficient) * (regression forecast for the S&P 500 excess return in the month t+1 / forecast of the S&P 500 excess return variance in the month t+1). Calculate the variance forecast for the S&P 500 excess return using a ten-year rolling window of past returns. Use the risk-aversion coefficient of 3 in the calculation. The share of the portfolio to S&P 500 is restricted to lie between 0% and 150%. The optimal allocation to the one-month Treasury bill is 100% minus allocation to the S&P 500 index. Compute new optimal portfolio weights each month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - using subsample analysis, including a pre-crisis subsample (1975M1-2008M8), a post-crisis subsample (2008M10-2021M12), and a pre-COVID subsample (1975M1-2019M12). GO performs better for a subsample that covers more economic recessions.

Therefore, for the interested reader, we might say they would be interested in studying possible findings in incorporating possible hedges.