The debate about the displacement of jobs by AI is an ongoing one, and it is not surprising that it has also affected the financial sector and especially jobs involving forecasting prices. The paper concerning this strategy takes a holistic view of an AI analyst, training it to predict prices based on a proxy information set, typically available to human analysts. In this way, it develops an ensemble model combining the prediction from an LSTM, Random Forest and a Gradient Boosted Decision Tree. Although the use of these models is not novel by itself, the application benchmarks this against the equity analysts, bringing about interesting insights into how we can leverage Machine Learning in stock prediction tasks. It is conjectured that this formulation forms some sort of a lower bound on what the AI paradigm can achieve using more data and possibly more advanced techniques. It does not, however, deliver a resolute win for the computers as the authors show that human judgment is important, especially in cases where there is less data to train on, idiosyncratic events that require knowledge of the industry, and less liquidity. They take this further by analyzing a model that includes both the Machine and the Analyst, concluding that this is the best decision-making system. In practice, this could be used by an analyst or a portfolio manager to refine his predictions by meta-modelling of the price, including their own price predictions into the model as a feature.

Fundamental reason
It is hard to pinpoint a single fundamental reason why the models can mimic and outperform human analysts. In general, the model learns to take the information set it is trained on into account, similar to an analyst that has had some experience in the industry and has also been trained, albeit with the training having a very different form. A nice heuristic to explain this on is the decision tree that makes a decision similar to an analyst, surjectively connecting an event such as a decrease in Crude oil price to the benefit of a price of a stock which’ production relies heavily on this raw material. The model learns this by minimizing some mathematical objective, while the analyst learns this by observing, hypothesizing and evaluating his hypothesis. With respect to the LSTM, this is a little harder to grasp intuitively. In general, however, the LSTM learns the patterns while allowing for sequential relationships in the features provided and also retaining the nonlinear structure of a typical artificial neural network.

Simple trading strategy
First, the data of sample analyst price forecasts are extracted from the Thomson Financial I/B/E/S database from year 1996 to 2016 including. This dataset is then merged with the CRSP and Compustat databases resulting in a final sample of analyst forecasts on 6118 firms which define the investment universe. Then the training set for the model is constructed using firm and industry information from CRSP and Compustat, textual information from SEC filings – specifically 10-K and 10-Q and 8-K – and macro data from FRED. All these features and their descriptions can be found in section 2.3. Then the LSTM, Random Forest and Gradient Boosted Tree are trained on a rolling window of past 5 years, predicting the one year target prices in the sample. Thereafter, a window of the forecasts for past 30 days is recorded and if the model predicts a higher price than the human analyst (for each day in this window) it is recorded as a buy signal and vice-versa if it is lower. Then the model buys the stock if there are more buy than sell signals and sell the stock if the converse is true. The portfolio is equal weighted and rebalances every month according to the procedure described above. Additionally, the position is liquidated if the signal from the model reverses, predicting a long (short) while being short (long).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not include any information in regard to this topic.