The importance of skewness and downside risk in pricing the cross-section of expected returns has received considerable focus in the literature. Still, such a focus has been nearly exclusively in the single stocks space. This paper is focused on investigating whether past realized skewness is cross-sectionally related to expected returns across a wide range of assets. It is already known that realized skewness is an indicator of returns in commodities. This research shows that realized skewness is a significant indicator not only of returns in commodities but of returns across a range of assets from different asset classes, including government bonds, equity indices, and currencies.

The main findings are that realized skewness is priced in the cross-section of asset returns, and mainly, it is negatively related to future returns. In other words, more negatively skewed assets may compensate an investor with higher expected returns. The patterns are pervasive across asset classes, with the associated average returns of long-short skewness-based portfolios displaying statistical significance. The single exception is the currency markets, where the average return of a skewness portfolio is statistically insignificant. This research shows that such long-short skewness-based portfolios across different asset classes show low correlations with each other, hence leading to considerable diversification benefits when constructing a cross-asset diversified “global skewness factor” (GSF).

Fundamental reason
Investors’ preference for skewness drives to the emergence of a skewness risk premium, and there are a few reasons why investors prefer skewness. It can arise from irrational demand for assets with lottery-like features, which raises their price and reduces their expected returns. These dynamics can explain the existence of a skewness risk premium in the single stocks space but could be questioned in a universe of futures or forwards that such short-selling restrictions do not apply.

Another good reason could be the rational excess demand for positively skewed assets by investors with cumulative prospect theory preferences. This could also give rise to the skewness risk premium and survive in the absence of short-selling restrictions, therefore, more relevant for our cross-asset focus. Such investors would overweigh the likelihood of events with a low probability of occurrence. As a consequence, they would not be willing to short positively skewed assets as this would expose them to a possibility of a large negative return, and similarly would not be willing to hold negatively skewed assets, but instead take a short position in them in order to increase the probability of a large positive return Such dynamics would overprice positively skewed assets, leading to their relative underperformance.

The last stated reason is selective hedging, which can also give rise to the skewness risk premium and survive in the absence of short-selling restrictions. The risk in the portfolio would be minimized, while the skewness would be maximized. Meaning that manager deciding upon the amount of exposure to hedge may not just focus on reducing risk, but also account for higher moments of the expected profit distribution such as skewness.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 19 equity index futures, 9 government bond futures, 9 currency forwards, and 24 commodity futures.

Each month, investor computes daily returns and captures the asymmetry in the return distribution by estimating the Pearson’s moment coefficient of skewness for each asset at each month-end using the previous 12 months on a rolling window basis. Then, for each asset class, he constructs a tradeable skewness zero-cost portfolio that invests $1 long and $1 short based on the cross-sectional rank of the skewness metric of each asset. He ranks assets on the basis of the negative of the skewness metric. In this way, he assigns the largest positive weight to the asset with the most negative skewness and the largest negative weight to the asset with the least negative (or most positive) skewness in the cross-section. He forms rank-weighted portfolios so that all assets in the cross-section are assigned a weight proportional to their cross-sectional de-meaned rank.

In addition to the skewness portfolio in each asset class, he constructs a global skewness factor across asset classes. He scales each asset class skewness portfolio to have full sample volatility of 10% and combines them all on an equal-weight basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - We can use figure 1 to estimate the sensitivity of skewness effect on the business cycle. Skewness effects in commodities and equities usually have positive performance in a time of stress (as our analysis also shows: https://quantpedia.com/skewness-lottery-effect-in-commodities/). However, performance for bonds and currencies is usually negative. The overall strategy has, therefore, mixed results during the time of stress.