The idea of the momentum strategy is to buy past winners and short past losers. Momentum strategies are widely spread among practitioners and researchers as well. The second group is still focused on the momentum strategy with the aim to improve the simple traditional strategy. In recent times, the focus of the researches was aimed at momentum crashes or periods where the momentum performed with large drawdowns and periods of persistent negative returns. Past research has tried to scale the strategy by target volatility, and time-varying realized volatility of the strategy, but this paper proposes a new approach. According to this paper, stocks with high returns are often highly volatile over the formation period, and as a result, the probability of stock to be included in the portfolio is related to it´s realized volatility. High volatility assets result in momentum portfolios with high volatility or in other words, portfolios with momentum-speciﬁc risks. Aforementioned would mean that momentum risks are a result of signal construction and ranking process.
Moreover, the assets with high realized volatility during the formation period have a tendency to lose the momentum effect. On the other hand, stocks with low realized volatility are connected with a strong momentum effect. This finding leads to strategies with risk-adjusted returns as signals, but it is not that straightforward. For example, past research has studied returns adjusted by one standard deviation (Sharpe ratio momentum). This paper suggests to use the N-th power of the realized volatility or in other words, generalized risk-adjusted momentum, where the optimal N should be found each month. Higher N means that volatility has more weight in the signal.
In contrast, the lower N means that the volatility is not that important – for example, if N is set to be zero, it is a traditional momentum strategy. The paper studied risk-adjusted momentum in stocks, equity indexes, commodities and fixed income. This strategy is focused on equity indexes.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, according to the paper, the high uncertainty of momentum strategies is driven by the cross-sectional realised volatility of individual assets. Highly volatile assets have a higher probability of being selected into the momentum portfolio. Still, such portfolios are connected with high excess volatility compared to another, randomly selected portfolio with the same number of assets. The results of portfolios formed in various assets classes support this hypothesis and suggest that momentum is profitable in less volatile assets. Highly volatile assets tend to lose momentum effect, but assets with low realised volatility are connected with a strong momentum effect. The traditional momentum strategy focuses on high volatility stocks, and as a result, does not perform favourably during high market uncertainty.
Moreover, by the optimal selection of the N (N is the power of the realised volatility), this novel approach reduces the risk of momentum strategies. The strategy can be aggressive when the markets are favourable, but also more conservative if it is needed, which leads to better portfolio characteristics. Additionally, the paper also compared results to the existing constant volatility scaling approach of Barroso and Santa-Clara (2015). According to the results, the generalised momentum approach is better, and it generates alphas that are statistically signiﬁcant.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of major stock indices from both developed and emerging economies. To be more precise, 24 markets: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, the United Kingdom (UK), the United States (US). Firstly, for each index, compute the realized volatility during the past year (252 days) as a root of the sum of squared daily returns divided by the number of days in the year (252). Secondly, compute the momentum of each index or the return over the past year. Generalized risk-adjusted momentum is computed as the momentum divided by the N-th power of realized volatility. The N can take value from 0 to 4 and is easily found by a grid search and steps of 0,1. Each month, the optimal N is found by maximizing the Sharpe ratio of the generalized momentum strategy (it is possible to maximize returns or minimize volatility) by using the past data. The indexes are sorted into quartiles, and we go long the top quartile and short the bottom quartile. Additionally (to compare the strategy to the time-varying volatility scaled strategy of Barroso and Santa-Clara (2015)), the strategy is scaled by the following factor: target volatility – the annualized volatility of market index (MSCI world) divided by the realized volatility of strategy over the past six months.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on the source research paper (see figure 5), the strategy has a positive return during the time of stress therefore probably can be used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets.