This paper documents a fantastic phenomenon: the Chinese stock market falls during Mercury retrograde and rebounds after this period from 2005 to 2020. This striking fact is driven by the common superstition of people and realized through the channels of investor attention. Motivated by the change in the Baidu search index for the term “Mercury retrograde,” which often peaks a week after the event begins and drops a week following its end, they lag the Mercury retrograde period by one week as modified event period and find the CSI300 index witnesses an average decline of 3.14% (every month) during the retrograde, which is followed by a notable recovery, surging by 2.39% post-retrograde. This is reflected in the strategy we propose for inclusion in our database: Simply, we hold (long, buy) index fund (CFD) during non-retrograde and short (sell) during mercury retrograde days. These opportunities occur four times a year (each period lasting 19–25 days). Authors, however, offer plenty of other bit crazy strategies based on astrological observations, which serve as decisions for trading execution.

Fundamental reason
The authors successfully constructed a bridge of behavioral finance, connecting these excessive phenomena with the high retail participation of China’s stock market. Such high-frequency and regular stock price declines and reversals can explain the excess volatility in the Chinese stock market (Hu, Pan, and Wang, 2018) and the excessive trading puzzle (Odean, 1999; Barber and Odean, 2000). More selling behavior and apparent loss aversion are expected during Mercury retrograde. The demographic characteristics of investors, such as age, education, constellation, and so on, are also related to superstitious financial decisions. Because of the lack of account-level data, scientists have no evidence specific to individual investors, which could be a focus for further research. More detailed data can open the black box of superstition to a greater extent.

Simple trading strategy
The recommended investment for this strategy is the CSI300 index, which includes 300 representative stocks in the overall Chinese securities market (you can use index futures, ETF, or CFD, for example). (Astronomical information is extracted from the website Astro Seek <horoscopes.astro-seek.com>.) Lag 1 week corresponds to one week following the entire (non-) Mercury retrograde period. (Therefore, the Mercury retrograde start and end periods selected later are also five trading days behind.) Post (1) refers to the performance of a complete non-Mercury retrograde period. Strategy execution: 1. one week (five trading days) after the start of retrograde, short (sell) CSI300 on that trading day (so you short it during retrograde lagged by one week). 2. From the day immediately following the end of a Mercury retrograde period, add again five trading days, cover (buy [borrowed] back), and immediately buy (go long) that index, and hold it until the whole non-retrograde period ends, which is: to the day just before the onset of the next Mercury retrograde cycle (both time points are subsequently adjusted with a lag of five trading days), when you again sell it (and so after, sell it short again). Based on the calendar, strategy is rebalanced dynamically and has one full-size (100 %) constituent, taking the whole capital in the portfolio allocated to strategy.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The selected strategy is a class of “Market Timing” strategies that try to rotate out of equities during the time of stress. Therefore the proposed strategy isn’t mainly used as an add-on to the portfolio to hedge equity risk directly. Still, it is more an overlay that can be used to manage the percentual representation of equities (or “equity-like assets”) in a portfolio. “Equity Market Timing” strategy can decrease the overall risk of equities in a portfolio, and it can improve the risk-adjusted returns. Moreover, as strategy’s goal is to hold equity market only in a positive times for equity market factor and be out of equities otherwise, therefore this logic can be maybe used to create amended market timing strategy (using original rules) which is out of equities during positive times and holds bonds (or goes short equities) during bad times. This new amended strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. However, performance/risk characteristics and overall correlation and quality of suggested amended strategy can be found out only by rigorous backtest and source academic research paper doesn’t give us any clues on how it will perform…