As the Chinese economy and its stock market are opening to the global world, it provides novel opportunities for investors and attracts researchers’ attention. It is well established that there are several key differences between US and Chinese stocks markets. For example, the proportion of retail traders or the number of state-owned enterprises. Therefore, the well-known results from developed markets may not hold in the Chinese market. Despite its size (after all, it is the second-largest stock market), it is still developing. Thus the rich anomaly universe in the US market might not be present in China.
This novel research paper examines a variety of well-known anomalies in the Chinese A-shares market. Considering almost every popular investment style such as Value, Size, Quality, Risk, Past performance or Trading activity, the paper is a perfect insight into the applicability of the notoriously known strategies also in China. This screener’s addition is related to the strategy based on the past returns and seasonalities. For example, the momentum is already well-examined in China, but seasonalities’ existence is a novel contribution to the academic literature. Moreover, while the momentum seems to be problematic in China, return seasonalities appears to be profitable possibilities. Stocks could be sorted on the same-month returns, where we expect a positive return or other-month returns, which are related to reversals. Additionally, these two anomalies can be combined into seasonal difference, which is the centre of attention of this screener’s addition.

Fundamental reason
In other markets, return seasonalities are well-researched. The literature has identified that return seasonalities exist on the individual stock level and that returns vary based on the month. Moreover, these seasonalities tend to persist for up to twenty years. On average, the sizeable same month return predicts positive returns, and the other months return indicates negative returns. Additionally, these two anomalies are complementary and do not subsume. Therefore their information can be combined into one anomaly. Lastly, both seasonalities should arise from temporary mispricing.
Furthermore, the authors provide some general results for all anomalies, considering the differences in the US market and whether those differences can be detrimental for the strategies. Firstly, the limits of arbitrage cannot explain the anomalies’ returns since the long and short returns are of similar magnitude. Secondly, also the great number of state-owned enterprises does not influence the functionality of strategies. Factor premiums seem to be present in both types of stocks. Lastly, the stock market reforms lowered the returns, but still, for numerous anomalies, the returns are significant.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed on RMB-denominated stocks listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SSE) and Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE) (A-shares). The data is obtained from China Stock Market & Accounting Research (CSMAR) database. The microcaps (the bottom 30% of stocks) are omitted.
Firstly, for each stock, calculate the seasonal return difference between average same-month returns and average other-month returns. In other words, it is equal to the seasonal return minus the seasonal return reversal. Both seasonal returns are based on cross-sectionally demeaned stock returns. Seasonal return is equal to the average historical same month returns. Seasonal return reversal is equal to the average historical other months return, which is computed as the sum over all other month averages. The averages are based at least on the past five years up to twenty years. Each month, stocks are sorted into deciles based on their seasonal return difference. Long the top decile and short the bottom decile. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not offer any insight into the hedging properties of the strategy.