Work in this study investigates the interaction between investors’ preference for lottery-like stocks and the momentum strategy as they rely on the MAX variable from Bali et al. (2011) as the proxy for investors’ demand for lottery stocks. To evaluate the joint performance of MAX and momentum, (Haghighi Zadeh, 2024) conducts a dependent double quintile sorting on stocks based on the previous month’s maximum daily return (MAX) and momentum. This presents a rock-solid opportunity for the basis of the strategy, improving already existing ones. We present it below: For the value-weighted portfolios, the high-MAX group yields an average monthly return of 2.5% by implementing a momentum strategy (buying past winners and selling past losers), compared to the low-MAX portfolio, which only delivers 0.25% returns for the momentum strategy over the same period.

Fundamental reason
Scientists explore several alternative hypotheses, including capital Gains Overhang (CGO), investor sentiment, MAX associated with earnings announcements (EA_MAX), idiosyncratic volatility, growth options, and information discreteness (ID), as well as standardized Unexpected Earnings (SUE). However, the final analysis reveals that none of these factors can explain the results. Building upon the framework proposed by Barberis and Huang (2008) and further developed by Bali et al. (2011), authors anticipated lower future returns associated with high-MAX stocks, regardless of their past performance. However, contrary to prior literature, their findings suggest that the joint conditioning of the momentum strategy on high-MAX stocks yields higher future returns. This suggests a reversal of the MAX phenomenon in the presence of a momentum strategy. Interestingly, the MAX-Momentum strategy not only diminishes momentum profits but also enhances them, as evidenced by the outperformance of the high-MAX portfolio over the low-MAX portfolio. The findings specifically reveal that, for the high-MAX stocks, the momentum strategy earns a monthly average return of 2.5%, whereas high-MAX winners’ (losers) stocks earn an average monthly return of 1.17% (-1.33%) in a value-weighted portfolio. In contrast, the momentum strategy alone only yields an average monthly return of 1.26%, with past winners (losers) earning 1.27% (0.01%) respectively. Compared to the momentum strategy itself, the outperformance of the MAX-Momentum strategy primarily derives from the performance of high-MAX losers rather than high-MAX winners.

Simple trading strategy
For the investment universe, consider common stocks (share code 10 or 11) listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), the American Stock Exchange (Amex), and Nasdaq financial and nonfinancial firms (exclude stocks with a price of less than $1 per share from our sample).
(Data about them are from the Center for Research in Security Prices [CRSP].)

High-level Nutshell Overview: The strategy involves having portfolios double-sorted based on (first) the previous month’s maximum daily return (MAX) and (second) momentum (MOM). Now, a little bit more in detail:

1. Sorting: Each month, stocks are sorted into quintile portfolios first by their maximum daily return (MAX) over the past month, followed by quantile sorting based on the cumulative return of the stock over the previous 11 months starting two months ago (MOMENTUM). Consequently, 25 portfolios (5 by 5) are formed, representing the double-sorting on MAX and Momentum,
2. Strategy Execution: the portfolios across quintiles, the differences between winners-minus-losers’ (WML), and the performance of high-minus-low MAX portfolios (H-L) across the quintiles: long (buy) top, short (sell) bottom quintiles.

Portfolios are rebalanced at the end of each month and obey the value-weighting methodology.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -