Unevenly distributed monthly returns that are relatively higher in the same calendar months in every year are connected to the seasonal return anomaly, which is documented among stocks on both the U.S market and the international market. Many academics dedicated their research to find an explanation for this particular anomaly, yet, no convincing explanation has been presented.
Information-cycle explanation for the seasonality anomaly is presented in this paper. To be more precise, if return seasonality is driven by an information cycle, seasonal losers will be more likely to occur in the period before the scheduled information release. And seasonal winners will be more likely to occur in the information-release period. After testing this explanation, it is discovered that seasonality anomaly is much stronger when it is consistent with the information cycle. On the other hand, it is almost non-existent when it is inconsistent with the information cycle.
Recent studies showed that returns are higher in periods with important scheduled news releases, also known as an announcement premium. When applying the idea of an announcement premium to the seasonality anomaly, the seasonal information releases at the firm-level influence stock returns. Further, it can give rise to the appearance of an anomalous seasonal return pattern when stock returns are responding predictably to firm-level information uncertainty.
The key finding is that the seasonality anomaly fits the pattern of an information cycle where investors demand a premium as compensation for bearing the information uncertainty before a firm’s news release. Secondly, firms release value-relevant information in fixed periodic intervals.

Fundamental reason
The information-related explanation for the seasonality anomaly has been documented many times. However, the approach typically used in the literature is to compare months with the information event versus months without it. It leads to a discovery that return seasonality is strong in both event months and non-event months and concludes that information events do not explain the anomaly. The authors have chosen a different approach that differs from the usual one by comparing seasonality that is consistent with the information cycle versus seasonality that is inconsistent with the information cycle.
Including the announcement of quarterly earnings as proxies for scheduled information releases, it is discovered that seasonality anomaly is much stronger when it is consistent with the information cycle, i.e. seasonal winners in event months and seasonal losers in non-event months indeed drive the seasonality anomaly. These return patterns imply that the seasonality anomaly fits the pattern of uncertainty dissolution during the scheduled announcement of information. Further, investors demand a premium for holding stocks with such information uncertainty, and they care about future announcements and price firm-level uncertainty. The authors show that such scheduled firm-level events lead to the resolution of uncertainty, so the returns in the announcement period are high, and correspondingly, the returns in the build-up period are low as uncertainty builds up towards the scheduled announcement.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database. The quarterly earnings announcements data (item RDQ) are from Compustat.
Firstly, to measure return seasonality each month, independently sort stocks into quintiles based on their average same calendar-month return in the past five years. This variable determines whether firms on average did well (badly) in the same calendar month during the past five years and if will do better (worse) in the upcoming similar calendar month this year.
Secondly, the measure used for information releases is the announcement of quarterly earnings. Split the stocks in each seasonal quintile into two groups. Stocks with prior seasonal information releases are those where the majority of the past seasonal months contain earnings announcements. Earnings are likely to be announced in the current month if the average fraction RDQ, the fraction of earnings-announcement months in the same calendar months over the previous five years is greater than 50%. The strategy takes a long position in seasonal winners with prior information releases and a short position in seasonal losers with no prior seasonal information releases. Positions are held for one month. Strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -