Quarterly earnings announcements represent the main recurring source of firm-specific news released by publicly-traded US firms. Prior to the announcement, financial analysts and investors form expectations of what they believe earnings will be. Earnings surprises, i.e., the extent to which actual earnings exceed or fall short of those expectations, are associated with stock price movements because they represent new information that shifts expectations of firm prospects. The theory of contrast eﬀects predicts a negative relation between yesterday’s surprise and the return reaction to today’s earnings surprise, holding today’s earnings surprise constant. The intuition is that today’s news will seem slightly less impressive than it would otherwise if yesterday’s earnings surprises were positive and slightly more impressive if yesterday’s earnings surprises were disappointing. This implies that a great surprise yesterday generally leads to lower return reactions for firms announcing today, even without conditioning on today’s news.
Further, the abnormal returns occur in response to a firm’s announcement, not the previous day when other firms announced their surprises. Thus, it is possible to create a trading strategy in which investor goes long (short) firms scheduled to announce today if yesterday’s surprise was low (high), yielding abnormal returns of roughly 15% per year. The strategy only includes firms in the top quintile of size, which means that, unlike many anomalies, contrast effects can distort the returns of large firms.

Fundamental reason
Investors react more strongly to more recent observations. The reason is based on a cognitive bias when they judge information within contrast to what they observed lately. This phenomenon is known as the contrast effect. Returns for ﬁrms announcing today are negatively related to earnings surprises released by other ﬁrms on t−1 but are not signiﬁcantly related to lagged earnings surprises on t−2 and t−3 or future earnings surprises on t+1 and t+2. A simple directional eﬀect is observed when a great surprise yesterday makes any surprise today (even more positive surprises) look slightly worse than it would appear if yesterday’s surprise had been lower. In other words, the magnitude of the return distortion depends strongly on yesterday’s surprise and not signiﬁcantly on the interaction between today’s and yesterday’s surprise.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks of the ﬁrms in the top quintile of size traded on NYSE. The trading strategy is a daily long-short strategy. The base of the strategy would lie in going long (short) with ﬁrms scheduled to announce today, day t, if yesterday’s, day t-1, the surprise were low (high). On days where the salient surprise at t−1 is below the 25th percentile of surprise t−1 (relative to the distribution of surprise t−1 in the previous quarter), the investor buys ﬁrms scheduled to announce on day t and shorts the market, holding this portfolio for days t and t+1. On days where the salient surprise at t−1 is above the 75th percentile of surprise t−1 (relative to the distribution of surprise t−1 in the previous quarter), the investor goes long the market and short with ﬁrms scheduled to announce on day t. Then holds this portfolio on days t and t+1. The portfolios are value-weighted based upon the market capitalization at t−3 of the ﬁrms announcing earnings on day t.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.