Earnings announcement days are important days for the overall performance of the stock as a considerable part of the whole stock’s performance occurs around this day. Most stocks undergo price run-up before an earnings announcement (as optimistic investors accumulate) and price decline afterwards. This process is especially strong in stocks with low institutional ownership which signalizes a higher share of amateur investors. Low institutional ownership doesn’t automatically mean low stock’s liquidity; therefore, a very profitable strategy could be easily built upon this finding.

Fundamental reason
Academic research states that overpricing due to overly optimistic investors is likely to be reduced quickly during earnings announcement when value relevant information is disclosed and dispersion of opinions declines after the earnings release. However, before the announcement arrives and this correction occurs, the overpricing would be briefly exacerbated if investors temporarily increase their positions to speculate on the outcome of the announcement. According to this scenario, the optimism of investors holding overpriced stocks gives them the incentive to further increase their holdings immediately before an earnings release, expecting that their presumed private information will be partially revealed at the forthcoming announcement. However, this additional demand from optimists is not matched by an increase in the supply from pessimists because of the limited ability of sophisticated investors to sell these overpriced stocks. As a result, the buying pressure associated with binding short-sale constraints and dispersion of opinions that allegedly underlies the overpricing. Hence, it could be expected the
strongest price increase in the period before the earnings announcement for stocks that are most prone to overpricing, to begin with: stocks with low institutional ownership combined with high values of the four predictor variables.

Research continues that after the announcement, there are two predictable components of the price reaction for overpriced stocks. First, overly optimistic investors will cut back the intensified speculative positions they entered before the earnings release to bet on the outcome of the announcement. As a result, the price run-up in the days before the announcement should naturally be followed by a reversal. Second, to the extent that stocks with low institutional ownership and high dispersion of opinions were already overpriced before the event, the earnings release will reveal that investors in these stocks were too optimistic on average, resulting in a further price decrease.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks from the Russell 3000 index. Stocks are sorted into quintiles based on institutional ownership and volume. The investor uses only stocks with the lowest ownership and the highest volume and periodically checks which stocks have close to their earnings announcement date. He goes long stocks two days before announcements and shorts stocks two days after announcements. Stocks are weighted equally, and the portfolio is rebalanced daily.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Based on the source research paper (see Table 2, panel B), the strategy can be split into two parts, and the short-only part which shorts stocks after announcements has highly significant performance and would be surely negatively correlated to the equity market. Hence, it is possible that strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. Independent backtest is, however, recommended.