Academic research shows that investors are concerned not only about volatility but also about skewness. The stock market’s expectation of skewness may contain helpful information for predicting future returns. At the same time, options markets have valuable information for forecasting. Therefore, the author used the options with different strike prices on each trading day to calculate the innovations in skewness. This paper is the first to investigate how option information affects the cross-section of stock returns in China.

According to Pan, Tang, and Xu (2016), Chinese investors are likely to be sentiment traders and tend to trade out of speculating motives. Moreover, according to Kumar (2009), individual investors prefer skewness more. Therefore, it is interesting to investigate if skewness is a significant factor in China and test whether investors in China trade out of hedging motives. Chang, Christoffersen, and Jacob (2013) claim that innovations in market skewness are negatively contemporaneously correlated with market returns. The author (Zhen) confirmed the findings mentioned above, with a correlation coefficient of -0.60 for China, indicating that stocks with high exposure to skewness innovations can be used to hedge against market downturns. On the other hand, in comparison with the correlation coefficient of -0.20 in the US, Chinese investors are more concerned about skewness risk.

Lastly, the author created the trading strategy, telling us to calculate the exposures of stocks to innovations in skewness (SKEW beta) by running univariate regressions. And finally, sort stocks into deciles based on the SKEW beta, longing the decile with the lowest beta and shorting the decile with the highest beta.

Fundamental reason
As already mentioned, innovations in market skewness are negatively contemporaneously correlated with market returns. The main reason for this phenomenon is the leverage effect. If the price of an asset decreases as a consequence of an overreaction, investors would expect a reversal – the price reverting to its previous level, increasing market volatility and skewness. Therefore, the benefit from skewness increases can compensate for the losses from investing in bear markets, making stocks with high exposure to skewness innovations desirable. Moreover, according to the author (Zheng), the negative risk premium of market skewness can also be partially explained by lottery demand, turnover, and short-term reversal.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of SSE 50 ETF options and stocks. The data come from the Wind financial database. Stocks that have been listed for less than one year are excluded.

Firstly, using the options with different strike prices on each trading day, for each day t, calculate the risk-neutral skewness SKEW_t following equation (2) on page 7. Then, calculate its corresponding autoregressive moving average model (ARMA), and let the ARMA(1,1) residuals represent the innovations in skewness (∆SKEW).

Secondly, at the end of each month, obtain the exposures of stock i to innovations in skewness. Run the following regression on the daily returns of each stock: R_t – R_f,t = β_0 + β_skew*∆SKEW_t + ε_t (equation (9) page 10), where R_t is s the return of the stock on day t, R_f,t is the risk-free interest rate on day t, ∆SKEW_t are the innovations in skewness on day t, and ε_t is the residual on day t. β_0 and β_skew are the coefficients to be estimated. β_skew (SKEW beta) represents the risk exposure.

Thirdly, sort stocks into deciles based on the SKEW beta. The first (last) portfolio contains stocks with the lowest (highest) beta. Weight each stock by its market capitalization at the end of each month, creating the value-weighted one-month ahead portfolio. Finally, long the top decile and short the bottom decile.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Paper findings suggest that the information in market returns and skewness are highly overlapping, and skewness cannot be used to hedge against undesirable investment situations other than market downturns. Therefore, some variations of strategies based on paper can be used. Stocks with high exposures to innovations in volatility or skewness can hedge against market downturns (a deterioration of investment opportunities).