An alternative tactical factor that may help transcend the weaknesses of value and momentum, has been proposed in recent years. This factor is called relative sentiment. It is the measure of how bullish or bearish institutional investors are compared to individual investors in a given market.
In this study, the authors examine Sentix 6-month-forward economic expectations indices corresponding to institutional and individual investors. From these investor-class indices, they construct monthly relative sentiment factors for the U.S., Europe, Japan, and Asia ex-Japan. These factors, coupled with one-month forward regional equity returns, were then used as inputs to a wide selection of machine learning models (which produce directional forecasts of one-month-forward equity returns). It is a fact that the effectiveness of machine learning techniques for predicting financial markets has been called into question (e.g., Makridakis et al. (2018)). But the authors found several of the machine learning techniques investigated here, in conjunction with various combinations of relative sentiment factors, produce statistically significant results, even after adjusting for data snooping. The machine learning algorithms are used as tools for unmasking any predictive power relative sentiment may have. According to the authors, this is the first study that used Sentix data to construct explicit relative sentiment factors.
This paper brings new knowledge to the literature:
1. It adds to the expanding list of explicit relative sentiment studies and confirms the results of prior studies regarding relative sentiment’s statistical significance.
2. It provides evidence relative sentiment surpasses standalone sentiment when it comes to forecasting equity returns.
3. It demonstrates relative sentiment works not only for U.S. markets, but for global markets as well.
4. It affirms the results in Micaletti (2018), which show relative sentiment contains more predictive power than time-series momentum.
5. It corroborates the results in Micaletti (2019), which show relative sentiment has the potential to identify the subsequent best- and worst-performing markets from along a cross-section.
Relative sentiment may provide more predictive power than time-series momentum, confirming the results in Micaletti (2018). Relative sentiment seems particularly adept at identifying when to take equity market exposure during periods of negative momentum. Beyond demonstrating the ability to beneficially adjust equity allocations within regions, relative sentiment also demonstrated the ability to adjust equity allocations across regions.

Fundamental reason
The fundamental reason for functionality of strategies in this study is based on past work on relative sentiment. Past work (direct relative sentiment, and indirect) has unearthed substantial evidence of relative sentiment predictive power for equity markets over intermediate time horizons. This study, which investigates relative sentiment factors derived from Sentix economic sentiment indices (for the U.S., Europe, Japan, and Asia ex-Japan), corroborates those findings and adds to that body of evidence. Of the 1000 relative sentiment strategies tested, dozens to several hundred (depending on the region) registered as significant after adjusting for data snooping. The levels of significance ranged from moderate in Asia-ex Japan and Europe, to strong in Japan, to extremely strong in the U.S.This strategy did not bring new methodology just testing existing strategies with specific dataset of data from Sentix.

Simple trading strategy
The used dataset consists of Sentix 6-month economic expectations indices for the U.S., Europe, Japan, and Asia ex-Japan. This dataset is available through platforms such as Bloomberg and Factset. The indices are the result of a monthly online survey conducted by Sentix. The survey results are mapped to index values and publicly released in the middle of the month. Beside aggregate sentiment index for each region, Sentix breaks out the regional results into their component indices, namely, institutional investor sentiment and private (i.e., individual) investor sentiment. These component indices are the ones that the authors used of in this study.
Relative sentiment factors with machine learning models were used to forecast one month forward equity returns in the same regions. For those regions, the authors have relative sentiment data, namely, the U.S., Europe, Japan, and Asia ex-Japan.
Daily total (U.S. dollar) returns for the four regions were obtained from Professor Kenneth R. French’s data library (French (2017)) through May 31, 2017. To these returns were spliced daily total (U.S. dollar) returns (over the time period June 2017 to September 2019) from ETFs representing the four regions. The used ETFs were: VTI, IEUR , EWJ , and EPP. Daily returns were spliced into monthly returns and align the monthly returns with the prior month’s relative sentiment factors. Relative sentiment factors for the U.S., Europe, Japan, and Asia ex-Japan were created. These factors constitute the input to the machine learning models. Beside an aggregate sentiment index for each region, Sentix breaks out the regional results into their component indices, namely, institutional investor sentiment and private (i.e., individual) investor sentiment. These component indices were used in this study. The principle of creation of factors is based on equation 1. If ISat and PSat represent the institutional and private sentiment indices for region A at time t, then is possible to construct a corresponding relative sentiment factor, RSA t , for region A at time t by simply subtracting the private sentiment from the institutional sentiment. Because not all machine learning models are capable of using only a subset of the input factors to make predictions, the authors trained and tested the machine learning models on all factor subsets that contain at least two factors. Table I lists these possible subsets (there are 11 of them). For each regional equity market there are 11 such input arrays, corresponding to the 11 factor subsets.
After the input data has been configured, the next step is to divide the input data into training sets and test sets. It was done using combinatorial cross-validation (CCV) (López de Prado (2018)).
More details can be found in Table II.
With the used dataset, the 204 monthly data points were divided into 14 groups of 15 points each (with the 14th group having only 9 points). The models were trained on 12 of those 14 groups, and test them on the remaining two. There are 91 different ways to parse 14 groups into 12 training and two test groups. The machine learning models were run on each of those 91 splits. Then the results across those 13 different backtest paths were averaged, to arrive at one composite backtest for each machine learning model.
The authors investigated linear and logistic regression, support vector machines (SVM), random forests, generalized boosted models (GBMs), and various implementations of classification and regression trees. All of these algorithms came from either the base R package or user-contributed packages. Bootstrap aggregation (“bagging”) was used, with 50 “bags” for all machine learning algorithms except random forests and GBMs, which underwent their own internal bagging procedures. For the SVM algorithms, weere considered several different parameter combinations.
For GBMs, were considered adaboost, bernoulli, and gaussian distributions. For the other algorithms, were used the default R-package parameters. Table III provides a list of the algorithms and their relevant parameter universes. There were a total of 90 machine learning models tested. With 11 factor subsets, this resulted in 990 backtests of relative sentiment for each regional equity market.
The test-set predictions for all models, were mapped to the values of -1 or 1, representing a negative or positive one-month-forward return forecast. These predictions were averaged across all bags and then further averaged across all sample backtest paths produced by the CCV procedure. This averaging yielded a composite forecast between -1 and 1. The composite forecasts were then mapped (linearly) to equity allocations between 0 and 1.
To determine whether a strategy may rightfully be considered significant, data snooping was controlled. It was done by so-called “multiple hypothesis testing” (MHT) algorithms. In Figure 1 can be found the performance of relative sentiment in the U.S. over the time period 2002-2019.
Total return curves are composites, averaged over the top 10 strategies (of the 990). In Table V can be found the performance statistics.
Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper itself does not provide any indications if it is suitable in market downturns.
