One of the explanations for the mispricing in the market is investor disagreement. In literature, investor disagreement has been hypothesized to be partly because of short-selling constraints. When the market disagreement is high, and some investors want to buy and some sell, assets may become overpriced as the result of the relative ease of buying the asset, while the difficulty to short sell due to short-selling constraints.
In this trading strategy, the authors Jacoby, Gady and Li, Shi and Lin, Nanying (2022) hypothesize that skilled hedge funds are able to recognize this mispricing when the disagreement is high and take advantage of it. They construct a measure of the sensitivity of hedge fund returns to the change of market disagreement, the hedge fund disagreement beta. It is constructed on the individual hedge fund level by regressing the hedge fund’s monthly returns on monthly changes of market disagreement. They find that the disagreement beta of individual stocks is predictive of the cross-section of hedge fund returns. This can be used to construct a simple long-only strategy, which buys the hedge funds with the highest disagreement beta.

Fundamental reason
As mentioned, it is often the case that assets become overpriced due to short-selling constraints. Skilled hedge funds are capable of identifying this mispricing, acting as arbitrageurs, and becoming profitable compared to the hedge funds, which fail to identify and take advantage of this mispricing. The study shows that especially hedge funds that are experienced and those with high incentive fees are likely to exploit the mispricing to improve their performance successfully.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of hedge funds with data available on the Thompson Reuters Lipper Hedge Fund Database (Trading Advisor Selection System, TASS) and with a net asset value of at least $15 million. Hedge funds in the fixed income arbitrage, managed future categories, and hedge funds reporting in non-U.S. dollar currencies are excluded. The data used to calculate the disagreement measure are analysts’ forecasts of the long-term growth rate of earnings per share (EPS), which are obtained from the I/B/E/S database. Only forecasts of stocks listed on NYSE, NASDAQ, and AMEX with share codes 10, and 11 are considered, and they need to have at least two forecasted long-term EPS growth rates every month. The monthly risk factors considered are market, size, value, momentum (data for which are obtained from Kenneth French’s data library), and five factors proposed by Fung and Hsieh (2004), which are a bond trend-following factor (PTFSBD), a currency trend-following factor (PTFSFX), a commodity trend-following factor (PTFSCOM), a credit risk factor (defined as the monthly change in the difference between BAA-rated corporate bond yield and the 10-year T-bond yield), and a bond market factor (defined as the monthly change in the 10-year T-bond yield). Data for the last two are obtained from Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED). For the three trend-following factors, the authors obtained the data are obtained from Dr. David A. Hsieh’s Data Library (viz page 11).
The sorting variable, disagreement beta, is estimated individually for each hedge fund, and that is done using the rolling regression model, viz. equation (1) on page 12. The variables in the equation are the excess return of hedge fund i on month t, a vector of contemporaneous monthly risk factors, the change of disagreement on month t, and the loading on the disagreement index for hedge fund i. The time series regression is run on hedge fund excess returns over the past 36 months, while at least 24 monthly observations have to be included. Then the portfolio is sorted into equal-weighted deciles using the estimated disagreement beta from the previous month. The strategy is long the highest disagreement beta decile and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -