The research concerning the Chinese stock market repeatedly shows that it’s genuinely crucial to examine this market. The reason is not only the fact that the Chinese market has become the second-largest in the world. There are some striking differences between other developed markets and China. The novel research by Li and Yang (2022) examines the extrapolation in China’s stock market. Empowered by the data from Eastmoney Guba (the largest online stock forum in China), the authors show that investors extrapolate the past returns with exponentially decaying weights. The paper examines the sentiment-based expectation defined as the number of positive minus negative posts divided by the sum of positive and negative posts. It shows that the extrapolations form the beliefs of investors and predict the returns. Furthermore, the authors also construct a non-linear model to explain the expectations and show that the predicted (fitted) and residual expectations are even better for the prediction. These findings could be utilized in a combined strategy that goes long the lowest predicted and the highest residual stocks and shorts the highest predicted and the lowest residual stocks.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, using the investor´s sentiment gathered from social media is not novel, and numerous researches use StockTwits data. From this point of view, the study is in line with other literature that points to the necessity to examine and understand the information presented in social media. Secondly, the authors examine the predictive power of raw, predicted, and residual expectations economically (portfolio sorts) and statistically (linear models with several controls). Both approaches show that the sentiment-formed expectations can be utilized to predict future returns, and these predictions can form significant strategies. Last but not least, it is essential to mention that the strategy is highly statistically significant as a value-weighed, which is a good sign given the number of micro-caps in China.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks in the China Stock Market and Accounting Research (CSMAR) database for which the Eastmoney Guba (online stock forum) data are available. Data for Guba are obtained from the Chinese Research Data Services (CNRDS), which uses the support vector machine to analyze the textual information of posts and rates the sentiment as positive, negative, or neutral. Firstly, the expectation is defined as the number of positive minus negative posts divided by the sum of positive and negative posts. Secondly, calculate the cross-sectional rank of investors’ expectations, which is the primary variable of the paper. As the next step, formulate non-linear regression that explains the cross-sectional rank, which consists of the two parameters and weighted sum of past returns from t to t-11 (where t denotes week) – the equation 3 in the paper. Nextly, consider four periods related to a given week m: one validation period from m-6 to m-1, and three estimation periods: m-18 to m-7; m-22 to m-7 and m-26 to m-7. To estimate the parameters, firstly, estimate the regressions on the three estimation periods. Then, for each estimation period, use the estimates to calculate the MSFE over the validation period. The final estimation of the parameters is the weighted average of the parameters for each estimation period, where the weights are the inverse of MSFE normalized to 1. In each week and for each stock, use to parameters to estimate the predicted extrapolative expectations (fitted) and the residual expectations. Double-sort the stocks based on the predicted and residual expectation into terciles (30-40-30) to obtain 3×3 portfolios. Long the lowest predicted and the highest residual stocks and short the highest predicted and the lowest residual stocks. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - However, some restrictions such as budget constraints or short-selling constraints shorts the stocks with low residual expectations and high predicted expectations (short leg weekly return: -0.274%, t=2.01), which can earn a weekly return of 0.692% (annually 43%, t=7.16), both statistically and economically significant.
