Pairs-trading (also known as “statistical arbitrage”) is an old and popular trading strategy in which a manager finds two stocks which have moved together historically, buying the undervalued one and selling short the overvalued one. Finding pairs that are highly correlated / co-integrated over time is the key to the success of this strategy. A natural choice is ADRs trading in the U.S. and their underlying foreign assets. The academic paper we present uses Asian ADRs as a trading vehicle (but other ADRs could probably be used as well). The strategy enters into trades only when the ADR is overvalued, and the foreign asset is undervalued (as shorting stocks isn’t allowed on some Asian markets). The strategy offers high returns. However, its risk is also very high (measured via volatility); therefore, caution is needed in implementing the strategy. An additional source of risk is that the Asian markets and the U.S. market have no overlap in trading hours, and it takes several hours to establish a long position (so the spread between the ADR price and the underlying share price might have already been reduced to zero).

Fundamental reason
The Law of One Price is usually used to explain the returns on pairs trading strategies. This law states that close economic substitutes (ADR and foreign stock) will exhibit similar payoffs and similar pricing. However, this arbitrage isn‘t without risk since exchange rate risk, pairs liquidity and problems in trade execution (it takes several hours to establish the long position as Asian markets and the U.S. market have no overlap in trading hours) can affect the convergence of the spread. Therefore, excess returns from pairs trading reflect profits earned by arbitrageurs in enforcing the Law of One Price whilst ensuring market efficiency.

Simple trading strategy
The strategy in the academic paper presented uses 64 Asian ADR-foreign stock pairs. The ADR position and its corresponding foreign share position are opened when the price difference (expressed in U.S. dollars) between an ADR and its underlying share is bigger than the threshold X (2 standard deviations). Trade is closed when the spread between the given ADR and its underlying shares is smaller than threshold Y (zero, for example). Since Asian markets are not open when the U.S. market is open, then sometimes pairs cannot be formed. Overnight, the spread may reverse, and then the long position is not established. In this case, the short ADR position is closed on the next trading day. The investor does not match the amount in dollars but in the quantities of shares. Thus, his net investment is usually never zero. Therefore, the strategy is beta-neutral, not dollar-neutral, since he does not match dollar amounts in his long and short positions. All open positions are closed (if they didn’t converge) at the end of the holding period (12 months). Half of the investor’s capital is used in the U.S. market, and half is used in foreign markets.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Pairs trading strategy is related to other reversal strategies – it is also a type of “liquidity providing” strategy. As such, it usually benefits from increased volatility or a drop in liquidity and performs well during market crises. However, source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, a rigorous backtest is recommended …