The mutual fund industry is a multi-trillion industry consisting of actively managed funds. In general, mutual funds charge a high management fee which they reason with the manager’s skill (measure by the alpha of the fund). However, it turns out that more and more often, the investor would be better off just investing in the market portfolio, as many mutual funds do not have a significantly positive alpha nowadays. A possible approach to solve the “missing alpha” problem is offered by this novel research. The reason is that the alpha is almost of the same magnitude as the return.
There are many approaches to measuring the manager’s skill (fund’s “superior performance”), but they all focus on the known factors and anomalies. For example, Edelen, Ince, and Kadlec have shown in their 2016 paper that the performance of mutual funds can be mostly explained by seven factors and on average their exposure is negative at 12-month lag and positive at 3-month lag. The fact that the mutual funds have both negative and positive exposure to the stock-specific characteristics suggests that the mutual funds’ performance can be explained by such factors. While there is a growing body of research regarding the mutual funds’ exposure to the asset factors, the relationship to these factors is not necessarily linear or known as apriori. The novel research by Bin Li and Alberto Rossi, therefore, uses the machine learning approach called Boosting Regression Trees (BRT) which does not require the relationship to be predetermined. The advantage of using BRT method is its robustness to outliers and ability to work with large data sets via using variable selection and shrinkage. The explanation of the mutual funds’ performance allows us to form strategies with statistically significant profitability with known exposures to the factors. The strategy practically combines the fund holdings and numerous stock characteristics to pick mutual funds.

Fundamental reason
As shown in the research, it is unfeasible to obtain a similar result using univariate sorts. This is due to many reasons, but mainly due to the fact that the mutual funds are exposed to too many factors simultaneously and the stock specific factors are non-linearly transformed to fit the mutual fund’s needs.
Hence, to address the obstacles of such approach, the research uses machine learning methods. Formulating the problem as a supervised regression allows to model the prediction independent of path, meaning that the performance of fund k at time t is independent of its past performance as well as of the performance of other funds. Li and Rossi have used BRT as their method of choice, as the extensive body of literature shows that in finance, the performance of BRT is competitive with neural networks and superior to different linear and non-linear methods. BRT uses a method of Regression trees for n times (where n is the number of boosting iterations), which allows reweighting of data iteratively by assigning higher weight to the poorly predicted observations.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the open-end funds available in CRSP Survivorship-Bias-Free Mutual fund database. The index funds, ETFs, target-date funds, funds with lagged total assets bellow 15million USD and funds with holding below 80% and above 105% in stocks are omitted. Firstly, the mutual-fund level characteristics are calculated as the weighted average of the 94 stock-specific characteristics (the full list is in Table 1) of the stocks in their possession, converting these stock-specific characteristics into monthly value if needed. Furthermore, the characteristics are winsorized at 1 and 99 percentiles and lagged, for mutual-fund level characteristics at t one uses stock-specific characteristics at t-1 with monthly factors, at t-5 with quarterly factors, and t-7 with annual factors. After identifying the mutual-fund level characteristics, BRT model needs to be trained each month with lagged fund-level factors and excess return of stocks at t to predict returns of mutual funds at t+1. The shrinkage parameter lambda is set at 0.1, number of boosting iterations n is set to 100. One then sorts the mutual funds into value-weighted decile portfolios based on their excess return. After sorting, one goes long in the decile with mutual funds with the highest excess return and short on the decile with the mutual funds with the lowest excess return. The strategy is rebalanced on the monthly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - However, based on Table 8, the strategy is significantly profitable during both recessions and expansions and high and low investor sentiment periods.