The aim of this paper is to provide insights into whether stock prices reflect risks associated with emerging technologies. New technologies often disrupt the entire industry and market. It is not known beforehand whether a new technology is practically viable or when it will be available for commercial use. Therefore, investing in emerging technologies must be rewarded with high returns as the risk of the investment is high.
The author started by identifying firms with high exposure to new technologies. In order to find firms that produce innovative work associated with new technologies, U.S. patent publications data from Google Patent were collected. Using a set of unique inventions, the author build a deep learning model that utilizes text and network data of an invention. DL model produce embeddings with which the author created tech clusters at the end of June of each year. This paper is broadly connected to the asset pricing literature the relates firm characteristics to asset prices (Dichev (1998), Griffin and Lemmon (2002), Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002) and more). Most studies draw a conclusion that innovation variables that predict future returns are a type of mispricing factor. The author showed that there is an innovation variable (the exposure to new technologies) that is associated with risks, and the risks associated with the variable propagate to stock prices. Furthermore, the author provided a new way of identifying emerging technologies. Not only text data, but also network data of patent system were utilized. The deep learning model build by the author used richer information than what previous models have used. Specifically, not only focal invention’s text data were used (abstract, claim, and description) but also use text information of the focal invention’s neighborhood patents. The deep learning model was trained in a way that the model effectively summarizes the vast amount of information and produces an embedding that describes the focal invention.
The author showed evidence that the performance of the portfolio is but driven by risks by investigating long term stock performance of firms with high exposure to new technologies and those not. Overall, the findings shed light on the risk-return trade-off investors make when investing in firms engaging in new types of technologies.
Fundamental reason
Fundamental reasons for functionality are based on the author’s own approach. The author started with a firm characteristic that pertains to risk, because new technologies are associated with uncertainty and ambiguity (Rotolo, Hicks, and Martin (2015)). Firm characteristic is the level of exposure to emerging technologies and using this it was shown that a portfolio strategy that uses this attribute leads to higher returns. Data were collected from U.S. patent publications from Google Patent. The author distinguishes patent publications and inventions, where invention is the term that he adopt to describe the earliest publication of the same creative work. Also, the author build deep learning model that utilizes text and network data of an invention, by using a set of unique inventions.

Simple trading strategy
Patent data were collected from Google Patent (more about data collection in Section 1. Data). On top of the U.S. patent publications issued after 1976, the author collected information on all U.S. patents granted before 1976 and international patent publications that are one or two hops away from a publication in a citation network. The one-layer GNN model was built that generated a vector for each U.S. patent publication issued after 1976 with an aim to use the vector to measure the similarity between an invention and other inventions. The GNN model was used not only the information of an invention of interest itself but also all the information of adjacent publications linked by citation relationships. More details of the model architecture can be found in Appendix A.
The author regards the multiple publications of an invention as the same invention. The resulting dataset is a set of unique inventions and the earliest publication date of each invention.
The one-month Treasury bill rate, the market excess return, SMB, HML, robust minus weak returns (RMW), and conservative minus aggressive return (CMA) were obtained from Kenneth French’s website. Accounting variables were collected from Compustat Fundamentals.
Construction of a firm-level measure for the exposure to new technologies: At the end of each year t, clustering analysis with all patents publicized in the past ten years were conducted. The input for the clustering analysis was a vector of 256 numbers that were generated by a deep learning model that utilized the text data and network data of a patent publication. The deep learning model used text information such as title and keywords appearing in abstract, claim, and descriptions. Moreover the model used text information of all the neighborhood patents (details can be found in Appendix A). The vector of an invention was condensed information that summarizes the text data of the invention (claim, abstract, description) and the text data of its neighborhood patents (publications that appear in the invention’s references). The author computed the cubic clustering criterion to find the optimal number of clusters. The new technology clusters were defined as the intersection of the top thirty percent of the first sort and the bottom thirty percent of the last sort. At the end of each year t, there were tech clusters that are defined as new technologies. Inventions that appeared for the first time in year t, were classified into those relating to new technologies and those not based on the type of clusters they belong to. The process was repeated each year so that all inventions were classified.
A variable was created using the information – NewTech. This is an invention-level variable that takes one if an invention belongs to a cluster that was classified as new technologies at the time the invention was revealed to the public for the first time. The summary statistics of NewTech can be found in Table 1.
Portfolio analysis – then the author performed a portfolio analysis to examine whether firms with high exposure to emerging technologies earn higher returns. Firstly, conduction sort analysis was made. Secondly, alphas of a factor created by sort portfolios were computed. A size-adjusted value-weighted portfolio were created by buying firms with high exposure to new tech clusters and selling firms with low exposure (new-minus old factor, NMO).
If we look on Table 4, it shows the monthly returns of new tech exposure portfolios. Each year, portfolios were formed based on firms’ exposure to new technologies at the end of June of year t from 1981 to 2019. The portfolio ’No’ was formed with firms whose exposure to new technologies is zero. With firms whose exposure to new technologies was positive, three portfolios (’Low’, ’Middle’, ’High’) were formed based on the 30th and 70th percentiles of the exposure. Firms were than sorted independently based on the NYSE median size breakpoint at the end of June of year t. Monthly size-adjusted returns of exposure portfolios (’Zero’, ’Old’, ’Mid’, ’New’) were computed by computing the average of double-sorted portfolios. For instance, the portfolio ’New’ is (High/Small+High/Big)/2. All portfolios were value-weighted portfolio where weights were market capitalization at the end of June of year t.
Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Companies that do not invest in innovation may be less resilient in the face of external shocks, such as economic downturns, or regulatory changes, as they may lose competitiveness over time.