The stock market has always represented a war of information. Whoever gets the information first or evaluates the information best, wins. In the past, it was shown that the investors who hold private information tend to turn their attention to the options market, as it provides better opportunities (leverage) to exploit their information. If these informed investors choose to trade options before they trade the underlying stocks, then the changes in option prices might carry information that predicts the future stock price changes.
The paper from Yigit Atilgan et al. (2020) sheds more light onto this effect by examining the relation between expected returns on the aggregate stock market and implied volatility spread in the options markets. The results of their test show that the spread between the implied volatilities of out-of-the-money put and at-the-money call options written on the S&P 500 index has a significant negative relation with the expected returns on the S&P index. In other words, at a time, when the spread between out-of-the-money put and at-the-money call options narrows (widens), we can expect a positive(negative) returns on the S&P index in the near future.
Based on these findings, the researchers provide a trading strategy which invests in S&P500 futures or the risk-free asset based on the changes in implied volatility spread. The proposed strategy would earn an investor an annual return of 11,09% from 01/1996 to 09/2008.

Fundamental reason
Investors with positive expectations about the future market conditions will increase their demand for calls and/or reduce their demand for puts, implying an increase in call option volatility and/or decrease in put option volatility. Therefore, if the put minus call implied volatility spread becomes lower, this implies an increase in expected returns of an underlying asset.
Also, the further findings show, that the effect is more significant during informationally intense periods (earnings announcements, cash flow and discount rate news) and in times when the consumer sentiment index takes extreme values.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P500 index futures. At first, we calculate the implied volatility spread each day as a difference between the volume-weighted average of the volatility spreads for all OTM put options, and the volume-weighted average of the volatility spreads for all ATM call options. A put option is defined as OTM if its moneyness is lower than or equal to 0.95, but higher than or equal to 0.80. A call option is defined as ATM if its moneyness is between 0.95 and 1.05.
The implied volatility spread is then used as the main (explanatory) variable of interest in a regression analysis where the excess return of the market portfolio is the dependent variable. Additional explanatory variables include expected conditional variance of the market portfolio (implied variance VIXSQ, which is equal to the square of VIX) and a set of control macroeconomic variables. Those variables include: the change in the default spread (the change in the difference between the yields on BAA- and AAA-rated corporate bonds), the change in the term spread (the difference between the yields on the 10-year Treasury bond and one-month Treasury bill), the detrended riskless rate (1-month bill minus its own 1-year back-ward moving average), the dividend-to-price ratio (which is calculated using the returns on the S&P 500 index with and without dividends) and finally, lagged return of the index.
On each day t, the data from the midpoint of the data set up to data of the day t are used to estimate the baseline predictive regression. The estimated coefficients are recorded and used to forecast the excess market return.
Then for each day t, the investment strategy invests 100% in the equity index if the forecasted excess market return is positive or it invests 100% on the risk-free rate if the predicted excess return is negative. On day t+1, the return of this portfolio is realized, and a new cycle of predictive regressions is estimated using an expanded window.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide any information about the hedging properties of the strategy.