In this article, the predictive power of many predictors proposed in the literature on Chinese individual stocks return was tested, based on the perspective of machine learning algorithms. The significant task of finance research is the predictability of stock returns. The classic Efficient Markets Hypothesis assumes that it’s not possible to forecast the stock market based on public market information (Fama, 1970). Nowadays, a lot of studies show the importance of many variables, for instance – variance risk premium, inflation, investor sentiment, and others, in predicting future stock market returns.
The main idea of this publication is to explore the predictability of the return of individual stocks in China with machine learning methods. Authors in the first step created 108 characteristics related to stock anomalies to predict cross-sectional stock returns. It was based on the daily return trading data of Chinese stock markets from January 1997 to December 2019. The next step was comparing the performances of six mainstream machine learning methods (least partial squares regression, principal component regression, elastic net regression, random forest, gradient boosting tree, and neural network model) with that of traditional econometrics model on the out-of-sample predictability of individual A-share stocks. In the third step, authors analyzed the importance of three different categories of stocks anomalies: momentum, liquidity, and volatility, in their forecasting power for cross-sectional returns of Chinese stocks. As the last step, the trading strategies was constructed. Also, the value of machine learning on the prediction of stock return was explored. This paper has three main findings:
1. Compared to traditional econometric models, Machine learning algorithms can significantly improve the out-of-sample prediction results.
2. The significant economic performance can be contributed by trading strategies constructed by machine learning algorithms.
3. The best predictive power on future returns has the liquidity indicators in the Chinese stock market.
There are three main contributions of this article:
1. 108 anomalies (factors) of Chinese stocks related to transactional data were constructed by the authors. The most of factors found are based on the US stock market. Stock markets in China and the United States have very similar characteristics in financial laws. Due to the development stage of Chinese stock market, there are differences. Therefore, is very important to examine how different factors perform in the Chinese stock market.
2. For prediction of the return of individual stocks in China was compared the effects of different machine learning methods. It was shown that machine learning methods can improve traditional econometric methods.
3. Based on the predicted stock return, was constructed trading strategy and was explored the actual economic value of machine learning methods.
Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the logic is the comparison of machine learning models and the predictability of the traditional econometric model. The classic Efficient Markets Hypothesis believes that the stock market cannot be predicted by public market information, as the authors mentioned. But a lot of studies showed the importance of many variables in predicting future stock market returns (for instance – Bollerslev et al., 2014; Ang & Bekaert, 2007; Campbell & Thompson, 2008). There are more than 400 stock characteristics that can predict the return of cross-sectional individual stocks (“factor zoo”). Nowadays, Chinese stock market is still in a stage of development and improvement. In this article authors used machine learning methods to explore the predictability of return of individual stocks in China. They analyzed the importance of three different categories of stocks anomalies (momentum, liquidity, volatility) in their forecasting power for cross-sectional returns of Chinese stocks. One of the results of this study is that machine learning algorithms can significantly improve the out-of-sample prediction compared to traditional econometric models.

Simple trading strategy
As a source of stock return, equity, and financial statement data for this article was used Wind financial database. The date range is from January 1997 to December 2019. The region of interest was the A-shares listed and traded on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock (China Stock Market & Accounting Research Database (CSMAR)). In this article authors used a monthly rebalancing period, stock return data are the monthly returns of stocks that also take into account cash dividends invested.
As the input for machine learning methods, all 108 anomalies found in the literature in the US stock market were used, based on Hou et al.’s (2019) and Qiao (2019). The anomalies can be divided into five categories (more details can be found in Table 1.):
1. Volatility (risk) – for instance beta, volatility, idiosyncratic volatility, …(37),
2. Liquidity – such as size, turnover rate, Amihu ,…, (23),
3. Momentum – such as 11-month momentum, 6-month momentum, momentum changes, momentum residuals, …, (9),
4. Finance – such as return on equity, gross profit margin, asset growth rate, …, (31),
5. Value – such as price-to-book ratio, dividend to stock price ratio, …, (8).
Authors used the following different machine learning algorithms in financial applications:
1. Ordinary least square model (OLS) – assumes a linear relationship between the explained variable and the explanatory variable, and finds the optimal regression coefficient of the data by minimizing sum of squared errors (equation 5).
2. Linear model with penalty terms – to solve various problems (high-dimensional data, the existence of the correlation between explanatory variables, the situation that samples are not independent and identically distributed), various improved OLS machine learning algorithms was made. If a penalty term is added, the linear model with a penalty term reduces the number of variables, giving one type of solution to the over-fitting problem in equation (4). Different penalty term settings represent different machine learning algorithms (equation 7).
3. Principal component analysis regression (PCA) – very commonly used method of dimensionality reduction in finance. The principle is to try to recombine the original variables into a new set of unrelated integrated variables, and select a few summarization variables to reflect as much of the original variable information as possible.
4. Least partial squares regression – the problem of the PCA method is that it retains the information with the largest variance, and the signal-to-noise ratio of financial data is too low. Retaining the largest variance information, it also retains a lot of noise information. Partly, PLS method solves this issue. By the addition of the term 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟2(𝑌, 𝑧𝑤), equation 9, the PLS method will consider the correlation between the compressed information and the explained variable while compressing the information, to ensure that more information related to the explained variable is retained (Kelly & Pruitt, 2015).
5. Regression trees model – the regression trees model is a nonlinear model that captures the interaction effects of variables, which is commonly used in machine learning. The regression tree is a method of dividing the space with hyperplanes. Each time the current space is divided into two, so that each leaf node is in an area disjoin with others in the space. There are two ways to improve the prediction: Ensemble and Boosting.
Random forest is a special ensemble learning method that build on the basis of decision trees.
Gradient boosting regression tree (GBDT) is an iterative decision tree algorithm composed of multiple decision trees, and the predictions of all trees are integrated as the final prediction. It’s the result of multiple regression trees.
6. Neural network model. The authors involve a total of five neural network models. The general structure of each neural network model is the same, just the number of hidden layers and neurons is different. Each of the five neural network models deploys 1 to 5 hidden layers, while the other parts of the models are constructed as the same. The specific neural network model settings are shown in more details in Table 3. NN1 – 1 hidden layer, 32 neurons per layer. NN2 – 2 hidden layer, 32+16 neurons per layer. NN3 – 3 hidden layer, 32+16+8 neurons per layer. NN4 – 4 hidden layer, 32+16+8+4 neurons per layer, NN5 – 5 hidden layer, 32+16+8+4+2 neurons per layer.
Hyperparameter Tuning – All data are devided into three parts according to time: training set, validation set, and test set. The article splits the samples of 22 years (1997 to 2019) into 3 parts: the first 6 years are the training set (1997 – 2003), the middle 6 years are the validation set (2004 – 2009), and the last 10 years are the out-of-sample prediction set (2010 – 2019).
The machine learning stock selection strategy in this article is to sort the next month’s stock returns predicted by all models on the last trading day of each month, and construct different asset portfolios according to the sorting results, as stated by the authors. Authors split data into decils. If we make average of all methods from Table 7., Panel A, column H_L, we obtain that the long-short asset portfolio strategy can obtain an average monthly return of 1,99 %, with a monthly average standard deviation of 6,13 % and an annualized Sharpe ratio of 1,13%. We can also see that the pure short asset portfolio strategy can obtain an average monthly return of 1,11%, with a monthly standard deviation of 9,00 % and an annualized Sharpe ratio of 0,43%.
Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper itself gives no indication as to whether this strategy is appropriate in the event of a market downturn.