Cross-sectional momentum is a notoriously known strategy that compares the past performance across assets and longs the winners and shorts the losers. The momentum strategies are enjoying long-lasting attention from both practitioners and academics. Therefore, the original idea is getting improved continuously. In the past, the main focus was on the lookback period or the signals adjusted by the volatility (or a power of the volatility).
The novel research connects cross-sectional momentum with machine learning (ML). Traditionally, the ML methods are used either for classification or regression. However, there is a strand of algorithms that are used for ordering or ranking the data based on their relevance. This group is labelled as the learning to rank algorithms. Although these algorithms are not recognised to be used in trading strategies, this research paper suggests that they can have perfect usage in strategies that are based on ranking. The authors show their usage in the case of cross-sectional momentum. Instead of the traditional cross-sectional ranking based on past performance, they allow the algorithms to learn from various data (past return, normalised returns and MACD-based indicators) to predict the ranks used as a trading signal. The results are provided for several methods such as RankNet, LambdaMART, ListNet and ListMLE.
Although the methods are significantly complex, the algorithms seem to outperform the traditional approaches broadly. Therefore, their difficulty appears to be justified and rewarded by the outperformance.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, considering the traditional momentum, the most common explanations are behavioural biases such as investor herding, investor over and underreaction, and confirmation bias. The added value of the presented strategy lies in the usage of the machine learning method. Therefore, the performance can be partially attributed to the algorithm’s learning and predictive ability, and naturally, to the proper training and hyperparameter tuning. However, the probably most important aspect is that the strategy is data-driven. The reason for the functionality may lie in the more expanded dataset compared to the traditional approaches. The machine learning method can be trained on all the data that simple strategies use, such as returns, normalized returns or MACD-based indicators. For example, the sorting of stocks is not driven only by one past return with a fixed window but rather by a much more expanded dataset. As a result, assuming that the algorithm can utilize the larger dataset for meaningful predictions, the outperformance compared to traditional methods is entirely understandable.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed on NYSE and CRSP share codes of 10 and 11. Stocks with prices below one USD are excluded. The main interest is the cross-sectional momentum. However, the stocks are not ranked based on their past returns, but the scores are obtained from a learning-to-rank algorithm. Firstly, the predictors (features of the machine learning model) include raw cummulative returns for past 3, 6 and 12 months, returns for the same periods which are normalised by the daily volatility that is scaled to match the period of returns and finally, several MACD-based indicators given by equation 9 (composite signal which combines various volatility-scaled MACDs) and by equation 6 (volatility-normalised MACD for k equal to 1,2,3 and computed at time t and the past 1, 3, 6 and 12-month periods). Next, train one of the learning-to-rank algorithms on a 5-year interval and use it for a subsequent 5-year period for trading with fixed weights and hyperparameters based on the training data. Every five years, the model is retuned. The algorithms include RankNet, LambdaMART, ListNet and ListMLE. As a representation, we consider the LambdaMART as an example, which can be described as a pairwise method that combines LambdaRank with Multiple Additive Regression Trees – see the original paper of Burges et al., 2010. Based on the learning-to-rank algorithm’s ranking results, each month, take a long position in the top 100 stocks and a short position in the bottom 100 stocks. The strategy is weighted by the target volatility of 15% divided by the ex-ante monthly volatility (the authors use the rolling exponentially weighted standard deviation with a 63-day span on daily returns as the proxy for volatility) and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Although the backtested performance is impressive, the strategy still suffered during bear markets (based on exhibit 5 and performance during the great financial crisis or downturn in 2018).