There are numerous possibilities for how to trade on the options market. One of those is the strategy called the butterfly spread, which involves a combination of four options at different strike prices. Usually, this is a various combination of puts and calls, which will profit the most if the price of the underlying stock does not change much.
In this paper, the author proposes his own new stock return predictor, which he calls the Butterfly Implied Return. As the name suggests, it is based on the change in the prices of the butterfly spread and their correlation with the VIX factor. The VIX factor is short for the CBOE Volatility index, which represents the market’s expectations for its future volatility. VIX is often used as an indicator of the risk or investors’ fear in the market. By observing the correlation between VIX and the prices of the butterfly spread, the author estimates a stock’s performance in a possible market crash. Therefore, a good hedge can be obtained by implementing a strategy based on this measure. The strategy is most profitable in times of crisis, but it realizes a loss when the bear market first upturns. Nevertheless, over the whole studied period, it produces a significant alpha and should be easy to implement, since it trades only S&P 500 stocks.

Fundamental reason
The strategy is best understood by interpreting the Butterfly Implied Return factor as a probability that a given stock will crash. This is so, because it is constructed as a correlation between the butterfly price change, which captures the change in the stock price, and VIX, which represents the investors’ fear in the market. It seems that this factor can’t be explained by traditional factor models. The strategy is profitable because it successfully identifies and shorts stocks that are most likely to crash with the market.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks tracked by the S&P 500 index. This makes sure that the stocks traded are liquid and the strategy will be easy to implement.
First, calculate the butterfly: The butterfly spread is generally constructed using 4 different options at 3 different strike prices. At the end of each month, for every delta from -0.1 to -0.9, approximate the price of the butterfly by buying a put option at the delta minus 0,05, another put option at the delta plus 0,05, and selling two put options at the delta (e.g., if the delta is -0.5, butterfly consists of put option at -0.5 minus 0.05, put option at delta -0.5 plus 0.05 and selling two put options at delta -0.5). Then, calculate the rolling 6-month correlation between the changes in the butterfly and VIX, and choose the butterfly with the highest correlation. (See equation (1) on page 7 of the paper).
Then, calculate the Butterfly Implied return following the equation (2) on page 8 of the paper. Note that the butterfly has to be positive, and in the 6-month window, there should be at least 60 valid observations.
In a decile portfolio, long the stocks in the top 3 deciles with the highest Butterfly Implied Returns and short the stock in the bottom 3 deciles. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - From the definition of the strategy and Figure 3, it is evident that the strategy moves in opposition to the market and could be an option worth considering during crises.