Can institutional investors’ proactive engagement in the news affect asset prices? The authors AJ Chen, Gerard Hoberg, and Miao Ben Zhang in the paper Wisdom of the Institutional Crowd: Implications for Anomaly Returns, study whether institutional investors can influence asset prices when communicating through the media. According to the authors’ model, it seems that institutional investors share information in this way. When an investor receives a private signal and publishes an article about it – in this research, they study only the Wall Street Journal – other investors can pick up on this information. This allows for arbitraging some of the largest market anomalies, that is, momentum and value, which would have been impossible for an individual fund. When the media consensus is reached, the institutional investors trade in a “crowd”, and the mispricing is corrected.

The authors construct a measure of “institutional prediction”. When this measure is higher, the institutions tend to trade more aggressively. The predictive ability of this effect is the strongest when it is crowd-sourced for a period of over three months. The authors use over 1 million WSJ articles to construct this measure and process them using textual analysis. They find that the articles that contribute to the crowd-sourced signal have to score highly both on institutional investor content and prediction content. Future stock returns are regressed on the InstPred variable, and the strategy consists of long-short portfolios sorted in 3 independent ways (on market capitalization, InstPred, and value/momentum values), where only high InstPred portfolios are traded. The strategy is rebalanced monthly.

Fundamental reason
The authors hypothesize that the reason for the predictive power of the strategy lies in the fact, that the institutional investors cooperate in order to exploit market anomalies they wouldn’t be able to exploit by themselves. So when an investor receives a signal of mispricing, they share it with other institutional investors over the media. As more investors learn and share information, the number of investors grows, reaching a critical size. At this point, arbitrage trades occur. The anomaly returns results, and prices are corrected. This is captured by the InstPred variable, which captures the intensity of news articles discussing institutional investors’ predictions, and therefore predicts their anomaly trading.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NASE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks with sharecodes 10, and 11, and with a positive book value of equity. Stocks with a price under $1 are excluded.
Firm financial information is obtained from Standard and Poor’s Compustat database, monthly stock returns are obtained from the CRSP database, and information on stocks’ institutional ownership is obtained from the Thompson-Reuters Institutional Holdings Database (13F).
The news data set combines the full text of articles published in the Wall Street Journal over the years 1979 to 2020 (provided by Dow Jones Newswires).

The raw article-level texts are processed in the following way: in each article, all characters are set to lowercase. Then the common stop words, and words with fewer than four letters are removed, separating the text into small units. Then, inflected forms of each word are converted to be of the same form (light lemmatization). This procedure generates uni-grams, which we convert to bi-grams of all adjacent uni-grams in the article’s original word ordering, which will be the final level of units.
Now we can exclude articles with subject tags not related to the industry-level economic news, such as articles about books, sports, entertainment, lifestyle, arts, and reviews, also WSJ sections related to non-economic topics such as Books, Bookshelf, Off Duty, Life & Arts, and Golf Journal are excluded (by using the journal section tags).

Next, articles are classified into industries based on their verbal content. In articles about publicly traded firms, tickers should be available from the Dow Jones database. Match these articles with the tagged firm’s industry SIC from CRSP, and then group SIC to Fama-French48 classification. If there is no ticker available, a machine learning algorithm is used to classify the article into Fama-French48 industries. Articles matched to multiple industries are excluded.

Now, we will construct an article-level measure of institutional prediction, which we will then aggregate to FF48 industries and merge with the stocks. An article’s relatedness to institutional investors is measured in two steps. First, words strongly related to the bigram “institutional investor” are identified. This is done using Google’s word2vec embedding model; the top 250 such words are chosen. The words that were chosen in the study can be found in the Appendix C, and the details on the construction are provided in the Appendix A. Anyways they will include bigrams like “fixed_income”, “portfolio_manager”, “investment_management”, names of banks, hedge funds, and others. In the second step, the relatedness between the WSJ article and the institutional investor is quantified. This is done by computing the cosine similiarity score between each WSJ article and the 250 words chosen. The result should be a score bounded between 0 and 1. Analogously, construct a score for unigram “prediction” in the same way as was done for “instiitutional_investor”. The product of these two scores is the final measure we were trying to construct. Now aggregate this score to the FF48 industries and to the monthly level. The score needs to be standardized to indicate high media coverage(this is done to avoid that some industries might have a persistently higher level of score than others). Standardization is done in a two-step procedure which is described on page 15.

The only thing left to do is to predict the stock’s returns in the next month by using Fama-MacBeth monthly regressions: the dependent variable is the return in month t+1, and the regression variables are the stock’s past cumulative return from t − 12 to t − 1 (momentum anomaly) or the natural logarithm of the stock’s book-to-market ratio (value anomaly), the WSJ institutional predict measure for the stock’s FF48 industry “InstPred” that was constructed in the step above, and an array of control variables.

Each month, the stocks are sorted into two groups based on the NYSE median market capitalization. Independently, stocks are sorted into three groups based on the 30% and 70% percentiles of the book-to-market ratio (value anomaly) or past returns (momentum anomaly) among the NYSE stocks. Also, independently, they are sorted into three groups based on the 30% and 70% percentiles of InstPred among NYSE stocks. For each of the 18 portfolios, construct value-weighted excess returns. The returns of 3×3 portfolios are the average returns of large-cap and small-cap portfolios within each category. We do this for both momentum (stocks’ past returns from t−12 to t−1) and value (log book-to-market ratio) anomaly. For both anomalies, we long the high Instpred and high anomaly portfolio, short the high Instpred and low anomaly portfolio. Rebalance monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Authors claim that the study’s results are not exposed to the momentum crash noted by Daniel and Moskowitz (2016). Anomaly returns are observed throughout our sample period, even during the financial crisis. These findings differentiate the channel from alternative explanations, for example, the notion that media attention to extreme events such as crisis periods might generate strategy results.