There are two stock exchanges in China, the Shanghai Stock Exchange, and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. Both allow the trading of two types of shares, A and B shares. In this paper, the authors study the volatility effect on the domestic A-share market. The Chinese A-share market is characterized by higher volatility, negative skewness, and herding. A major difference to the US stock market is that whereas the US market is highly institutionalized, the China A-shares market is not. Hu, Pan, and Wang (2020) estimate that 80% of the trading volume on Chinese stock exchanges is from local, private investors.
The volatility effect is a common and well-researched topic in the developed markets and there are even smart beta ETFs which exploit this anomaly. However, given the characteristics of Chinese market mentioned above, is the volatility effect present also in China? Wang and Di Iorio (2007) and others find that market beta is not priced in China, which indicates that the low-risk anomaly also exists in China. The authors confirmed that the low-risk anomaly is also strongly present in the local China A-shares market. Despite predictions of theoretical asset pricing models, the least risky stocks in China earn the highest returns, while the riskier stocks earn the lowest returns.
The main driver of the low-risk anomaly in China is volatility, and not beta. These findings are highly consistent with previous empirical evidence for the US and international developed and emerging equity markets. However, the Fama-French style VOL factor cannot be explained by the established Fama-French-Carhart factors, and even shows a stronger risk-adjusted performance than each of these other factors.
Overall, the results indicate that the volatility effect is a ubiquitous phenomenon. Further, the explanations should be able to account for its presence in highly institutionalized markets such as the US, but also in the Chinese market where trading is dominated by local, private investors.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, consistent with previous studies on the low-risk effect, the paper shows that the main driver of the anomaly is volatility. The volatility effect shows similar results for shorter (up to 1-month) and longer (up to 5-year) volatility estimation periods. Further, is also robust across sectors and persistent over time. A Fama-French style VOL factor shows a higher risk-adjusted premium than each of the other factors in the Fama-French-Carhart model.
Additionally, the volatility effect in China seems to be a distinct anomaly. The strategy is impossible to explain by the size and value factors and it is uncorrelated with the volatility effect in other markets. This argues against any kind of unified risk-based explanation for the volatility premium.
Lastly, China has political and economic environments quite different from those in the US and other developed economies. China largely restricts participation by foreign investors in its domestic stock market as well as participation by its domestic investors in foreign markets. Moreover, unlike the US market, which is highly institutionalized, trading on the Chinese stock exchanges is dominated by private investors. The authors discovered that the volatility effect is also strongly present in a market dominated by private investors. This finding indicates that the phenomenon could have multiple drivers. Private investors may be more prone to behavioral biases, as discussed in Blitz, Falkenstein, and van Vliet (2014), or overpay for risky stocks because of their lottery-ticket features. Further, private investors aim to outperform other investors and therefore have a relative performance objective, similar to institutional investors.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of A-share stocks with common shares from the Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE) and Shanghai Stock Exchange(SSE) which are constituents of the MSCI China A Onshore Index and Onshore Investable Market Index for that particular month. It is required that stocks have valid market capitalization data to be included. Micro-caps are excluded.
Firstly, sort stocks every month in to deciles based on their past 36-month volatility. The past volatility of a stock is calculated by taking the standard deviation of its monthly total returns over the preceding 3 years. The strategy requires 36 monthly return observations when calculating volatility. The top decile contains the stocks with the highest volatility and the bottom decile the stocks with the lowest volatility. The strategy takes a long position in the lowest decile and a short position in portfolios within the highest decile. Portfolios are rebalanced monthly and are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Although it is a long-short equity strategy, it has a negative beta of -0.36