The Book-to-Market effect is probably one of the oldest effects which have been investigated in financial markets. It compares the book value of the company to the price of the stock – an inverse of the P/B ratio. The bigger the book-to-market ratio is, the more fundamentally cheap is the investigated company. Prior research shows that the book-to-market (B/M) ratio can explain the cross-sectional variation in stock returns. This finding has had a great impact on both academic research and real-world investing. However, there is growing evidence in the literature showing that the B/M measure is losing explanatory power in the cross-section of stock returns. Existing factor models cannot explain plenty of anomalies and researchers propose a new asset pricing model that does not use B/M. Fama and French (2015) show that the B/M factor becomes redundant for describing stock returns when profitability and investment factors are used along with the market and size factors.
However, the author is arguing that the growth of goodwill and unrecorded intangible assets such as technology, innovative business models, and brand names are related to the change, and suggests iB/M, an intangible-adjusted measure, as an alternative. iB/M is based on two adjustments for book values: capitalizing unrecorded knowledge capital (Kcap) and organization capital (Ocap), and subtracting goodwill that is subject to the issue of unverifiable fair value estimates. The paper suggests that value index providers and asset pricing researchers adjust book values by adding unrecorded intangibles and subtracting goodwill when they estimate valuation ratios of companies. The main contribution of this paper is to show that an imperfect proxy is better than ignoring unrecorded intangible assets when the book-to-market measure is used for asset pricing research and stock valuation.

Fundamental reason
For decades, finance institutions, stockbrokers and others have employed the same relatively static, highly profitable business models. But today they find themselves confronted on all sides by innovators seeking to disrupt their businesses. Tangible assets like property, plant, and equipment (PP&E) were the most important assets of companies when the B/M measure was developed in the 20th century, the intangible assets like technology, innovative business models, and brand names are becoming more dominant in the 21st century. Study analyzes the impact of intangible assets and related transformations in accounting standards. It shows that the B/M effect is weaker after new standards on intangibles became effective, especially in firms that have goodwill and impairment risk. Why the intangible assets affect the B/M to a great extent? Accounters face many challenges when they value intangible assets, leading to the issues of conservative accounting biases in book value unrecorded intangible assets and unverifiable fair value estimates. Furthermore, for example, most R&D expenditures are expensed immediately rather than capitalized even though they generate long-term benefits. Therefore, the values of most internally developed technologies are not recorded on balance sheets, resulting in underestimated book values. Many other expenses have similar issues, such as marketing expenses to develop brand names, etc.. As numerous intangible assets are unrecorded on the balance sheets of US public firms and it affects many models, and strategies. In this case the book-to-market effect.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of US stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). Firstly, estimate the knowledge capital (Kcap), which is the research and development expense. Secondly, estimate the organization capital (Ocap). A firm accumulates its Ocap by spending on selling, general, and administrative expenses (SG&A). Thirdly, following Fama and French (2018), define the book value of common equity BE. Fourthly, define the intangible-adjusted book value of common equity (iBE) as BE plus Kcap plus Ocap minus the Goodwill. Finally, calculate an intangible-adjusted book-to-market ratio (iB/M) using iBE. When calculating B/M and iB/M, the numerator is BE or iBE, adjusted with net share issuance (NSI), and the denominator is the total market value of equity that is price times shares outstanding from CRSP. The whole process of estimation is the best described by the Table on page 9 – “Summary of the five steps for calculating the intangible-adjusted book-to-market ratio, iB/M”. Sort stocks into deciles based on NYSE breakpoints at the end of June. Long the top decile, short the bottom decile and hold the portfolios for the following year. The strategy is value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Examining the performance from Figure 2, it is stable. However, it is still the long-short equity strategy; therefore, it cannot be taken as a complete hedge to the equity market. It seems that market downturns have still negatively affected the strategy.