Using big data is the current hit among trading strategies, though this field is still undeveloped and grows very fast. Customer behavior in stores and e-shops has become a relevant source of information for investors. The authors constructed three sales proxies from different information sources. IN-STORE measures consumers’ intention to visit a retail shop, WEB follows the number of visits to the firm’s website, and BRAND estimates an interest in product brand names.

While the work of Froot, Kang, Ozik, and Sadka – “What do measures of real-time corporate sales say about earnings surprises and post-announcement returns?” examines the aforementioned information for 60 firms, this paper expands research on 330 firms. Additionally, the authors study the speed of information spread through individual consumer activities and changes in sales during the pandemic. No surprise, the WEB information spread the fastest, and we can observe the increase in online sales and decrease in offline sales during the pandemic years. The study shows that all of the three proxies are effective in predicting portfolio returns. The strategy tells us to create quintile portfolios based on customer behavior, and take a long position on the highest quintile portfolios and a short position on the lowest quintile portfolios.

Fundamental reason
Using alternative data helps to gain an advantage over investors who use only traditional sources of information. Research states that consumer big data contain relevant information about firms’ fundamentals and help predict asset prices. The data can be used to estimate the relative popularity of various investments. As already mentioned, WEB information is impounded in stock prices more quickly than the information in IN-STORE and BRAND. Because of that, the return predictability is stronger during the covid period as WEB information increases and IN-STORE information decreases. Moreover, WEB significantly predicts earnings surprises, while BRAND and IN-STORE provide a forecast of revenue growth. Last but not least, the strategy is generally robust to different transaction costs.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 330 US stocks in various industries. Data concerning stock returns and prices come from CRSP, and financial statements data come from Compustat. Construct three sales proxies: consumers’ intention to visit a retail shop (IN-STORE), the number of visits to the firm’s website (WEB), and an interest in product brand names (BRAND).
Construct three long-short value-weighted portfolios based on sales proxies each calendar month. The sales proxies are estimated from the growth rate of consumer activities during the last three months. Create three quintile portfolios based on sales proxies at month t and calculate the average return for month t+1. Take a long position on the highest quintile portfolios and a short position on the lowest quintile portfolios. Create an equally-weighted portfolio consisting of the three strategies.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It does not seem that the strategies could be used as hedge (Exhibit 4).