Many anomalies are constructed based on low-frequency information (such as annual) or have data available only infrequently. A new academic study introduces a simple investment strategy to incorporate the higher frequency information into a portfolio based on a common equity anomalies/effects (the operating profit anomaly, the gross profitability anomaly, the asset growth anomaly, the book-to-market ratio anomaly, the investment growth anomaly, the net stock issue anomaly, the accrual anomaly and the net operating asset anomaly). For eight major anomalies, the study states that the enhanced anomalies can double the average returns while having the same or lower risks. The strategy suggests using trend signals to drop low performing stocks from a winner portfolio and high performing stocks from the loser portfolio for each factor in the portfolio.

Fundamental reason
One common feature of many equity anomalies is that they are formed based on low-frequency information which means that portfolios are often rebalanced annually. However, stock price data are available on higher frequency and investor can use this information to update his portfolio views (which were based on low-frequency information).

Simple trading strategy
For each anomaly, in June of each year t, investor ranks all stocks based on one of the eight accounting variables for the fiscal year ending in calendar year t−1. All stocks are assigned in one of the deciles. The investor then constructs the equal-weighted decile portfolios and further the spread portfolio, which takes a long position on either Decile one or ten, whichever has the highest average return (Decile High) and takes a short position on the other extreme decile (Decile Low). The portfolios are rebalanced at the end of June of year t + 1. Then, at the end of each month, investor calculates 50 and 200 days moving average for each stock in a portfolio. At the end of each month, investor compares MA50 short trend signal with MA200 long trend signal and drops undesirable stocks. More specifically, for decile high, he drops any stocks if the short trend signal is below the long trend signal and for decile low, he drops any stocks if the short trend signal is above the long trend signal.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on the source research paper (see Tables 14 and 15), the strategy has a positive return during low sentiment and high volatility months therefore probably can be used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets.