It is well-observed that the investors in the stock market tend to invest in the stocks with the similar characteristics to the stocks which have experienced positive returns recently. This may be caused by measuring the similarity of the characteristics or simply by investing in the stocks within the same industry. Subsequently, the price of such stocks goes up due to the increased demand. The novel research of He, Wang, and Yu tries to explain the implications of investing based on the similarity of stock specific characteristics. They also identify and differentiate from other effects that might influence the returns such as the positive correlation with the average return of the similar stocks (traditional momentum) and also the positive correlation with the lagged returns of the similar stocks (lag 1 and lag 12). To contribute differently to the already well researched topic, their focal point is on the average return of the stocks with similar stock specific characteristics over the past 1 month and its predictive power.
He, Wang, and Yu construct new variable which they call the similarity between two stocks (SIM) which they compute for each stock using the Euclidean distance of the standardized individual stock-specific characteristics (Price, Book to Market, Size, Operating Profitability, Investment) of every pair of stocks. The results show that investing based on the similarity effect records significantly positive returns and significantly positive alphas for strategies based on average return of similar stocks.

Fundamental reason
The research paper by He, Wang, and Yu controls whether their approach is novel and yet unobserved by following the methodology of constructing the style return of Wahal and Yavuz. For the later, they use numerous firm-level characteristics (past 1month return, cumulative return from month t-12 to month t-2, …), long-term reversal, idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL), maximum daily return, skewness, and coskewness. To control for the Retail Order Imbalance, they follow the work of Lee and Ready to classify all trades as buy or sell initiated and the work of Lee to compute the size. Using these two measures, they compute the retail order imbalance (RIMB) as defined in equation 2.
Furthermore, they control for known anomalies by using double sorted portfolios and Fama-MacBeth regressions. The results show that the similarity effect investing is persistently significant even after controlling for the various known anomalies (results can be seen in table 4).
Moreover, the finding of this novel research paper is in agreement with the empirical fact that the investor tends to buy more stocks of the high similar-stocks returns based on the similarity-based investing behaviour.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ with CRSP codes 10 and 11. Stocks with the stock price less than 1 USD at the portfolio formation date are omitted. For each stock included in the sample compute the euclidean distance to each stock in the sample based on the Price, Book to Market, Size, Operating Profitability and Investment. Secondly, using the Euclidean distance, compute the similarity between two stocks (SIM) of each stock as the value weighted average excess return of the closest 50 stocks of the past month. Then split the sample into deciles based on their SIM. The portfolio goes long on the decile with the highest SIM and shorts the decile with the lowest SIM. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced on the monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include any information about usability as a hedge.