The global financial crisis in 2008/2009 has brought increased interest in volatility trading as a long position in VIX futures was one of the few strategies which performed well during this crisis period. The long position in volatility demonstrated good hedging ability against losses on equity markets, and therefore the great number of various vehicles offering volatility exposure started to jump out. Various ETN structures are especially popular as it is easy to invest in them even for retail traders. Market with volatility products evolved from simple long/short volatility ETNs (VXX, VXZ or XIV) to more complicated active products. These products trade baskets of futures with different maturities intending to exploit term structure and at the same time, preserve long volatility exposure. The two most known such products are XVIX and XVZ ETNs. Alexander and Korovilas, in their academic research, performed an in-depth analysis of several different volatility structures, and they suggest active strategy as an overlay of these two ETNs. Final strategy has interesting risk/return characteristics with a great hedging potential. However same research also gives some warning regarding investment in volatility ETNs as those products incur high costs coming from front-running issuer trades during ETN’s hedging. Caution is therefore recommended during implementation as a strategy could be highly impacted by these costs, which were not present in a backtest.

Fundamental reason
According to academic research, XVIX and XVZ ETNs have a complementary performance, the XVIX performs best when the market is in contango, and the XVZ only performs well during market crashes, i.e. when the VIX futures term structure swings into steep backwardation, at which time it performs very well indeed, exactly when the XVIX makes a significant loss.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of two ETNs – XVIX and XVZ. The strategy is built upon finding that those 2 ETNs perform differently under two VIX futures market states – one in which VIX futures are in contango and one in which VIX futures are in backwardation. Therefore each day investor looks on the ratio of the 30-day implied volatility index (VIX) to the 93-day implied volatility index (VXV). When the ratio is lower than 1 (higher than 1), the short end of the VIX term structure is in contango (backwardation). The trading strategy holds XVIX when the VIX term structure is in contango and XVZ when VIX term structure is in backwardation. The portfolio is rebalanced daily.

Quantpedia notes: XVIX ETF no longer exists. It attempted to capture the spread between the S&P 500 VIX Mid-Term and Short-Term Futures, based on the steepness of the VIX futures curve. The ETN took a 100 percent long position in midterm futures while taking a 50 percent short position in short-term futures in an attempt to capitalize on the contango that’s often seen with short-term VIX futures. XVIX ETF can be easily simulated by going 100 percent long VXZ ETF while taking a 100 percent long position in SVXY ETF too.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on the source research paper (see Table 8), CVZ strategy has a strongly negative correlation against S&P Index therefore probably can be used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets.

