Liquidity has a powerful impact on price and the valuation of equities, and academic research shows it is an independent risk factor (the same way as value, momentum, and size factors). Stocks with little liquidity are used to earning higher returns than stocks with high liquidity. Several liquidity measures exist, and the research paper presented uses annual turnover, defined as the number of shares traded divided by the stock’s outstanding shares. The main advantage of turnover against volume is its market capitalization-neutrality, as either small-cap or large-cap stocks can have low or high turnover rates. Although turnover is capitalization neutral, the liquidity effect is the strongest among micro/small-cap stocks. We present the impact of liquidity on returns for the lowest capitalization quartile from the largest 3 500 stocks, but the liquidity premium holds regardless of the size group. We strongly recommend readers to examine the whole academic paper, as the liquidity effect is also a very strong enhancement of the value (~17% p.a. spread between low turnover value stocks, and high turnover growth stocks) and momentum (~11,8% p.a. spread between low turnover high momentum stocks and high turnover low momentum stocks) factors.

Fundamental reason
Research shows that less liquid assets are discounted in price, while more liquid assets have higher prices for the same set of expected cash flows. Correspondingly, less liquid assets have higher expected returns, while more liquid assets have lower expected returns. Investors require an additional return for holding illiquid assets; therefore, this pattern holds in nearly every asset, and higher performance for less liquid equities is no exception.

Simple trading strategy
The top 3 500 companies from NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ with the highest market capitalization are part of the investment universe (the stock’s per-share price must be at least $2, and the market capitalization must be no less than $10 million; REITs, warrants, ADRs, ETFs, Americus Trust Components and closed-end funds are all excluded). Stocks are then divided into quartiles based on their market capitalization. Stocks from the lowest market-cap quartile are again divided into quartiles based on their turnover (the number of shares traded divided by the stock’s outstanding shares) in the last 12 months. The investor goes long on stocks with the lowest turnover and short on stocks with the highest turnover. The portfolio is rebalanced once a year (in December), and stocks are weighted equally.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Stocks with low liquidity usually do not perform well during market crises.