Very small stocks with exceptionally high volatility are one of the last fields where it is possible to generate a substantial alpha. The paper from Han, Yang, and Zhou presents one such strategy, which has a small correlation to the overall market and shows stability in its performance even during changes in the business cycle. Their strategy buys highly volatile stocks that have a positive trend in the short horizon (stocks which have crossed their 10-day simple moving average). The strategy has to be implemented on an automated algorithmic basis as the evaluation and execution needs to be done daily on close for a large portfolio of stocks. Great caution is needed during the strategy implementation as its alpha is created on the most illiquid, the most volatile, and the smallest stocks which exist on the market.

Fundamental reason
Trend following strategies work because of stock price continuation due to the under-reaction to public information by investors. Investors under-react even more in the case of greater information uncertainty, which is well approximated by asset volatility (which is usual on small-cap stocks).

Simple trading strategy
This strategy could be implemented in several ways. One way is to sort all stocks on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ based on their size and use only the bottom deciles (the smallest stocks) as the investment universe. A simpler version then goes long on stocks which have crossed their ten-day moving average (have a positive trend) at the close of the business day and rebalances the portfolio each day. The portfolio of stocks (which satisfies the entry rules) is value-weighted, and the investor holds cash instead of stocks that don’t satisfy the 10-day SMA rule. The trading system is possible to implement in a long-only version or long-short version (when the investor shorts all stocks in their respective size decile to capture only the pure alpha of stocks with a positive trend). A fine-tuned strategy could sort small size stocks into deciles based on their respective volatility and use only the most volatile stocks.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only. Therefore, it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities. Therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).