The three most known factors used for explanation of stocks movements are momentum, value and size factor. They are popular between academics and also practitioners to form market-neutral equity portfolios. These factors work well within countries, but there is not a lot of academic research exploring these factors within-country portfolios. An interesting academic paper from Zaremba and Konieczka is dedicated to answering this question. It shows that momentum, value and size factors work well also within inter-country portfolios. Expansion of ETFs and futures trading together with a higher volume in the last years allows investors cheaply implement strategies from selected paper. We use a combined value + momentum trading strategy as a sample strategy for database inclusion.

Fundamental reason
Research shows that low-priced companies are often undervalued and have higher growth potential. Academic research postulates that investors overreact to news and events; “winners,” i.e. favourite countries, tend to be overvalued while “losers”, i.e. neglected countries, are undervalued. The contrarian investor can, therefore, exploit this generic investor mentality to capitalize on the inefficiency of the market to reap financial gains when stock prices revert to their intrinsic values. Academic studies show strong support also for momentum effects. The main reasons for anomaly persistence are behavioural biases like investor herding, investor over and underreaction and confirmation bias. Combined Value + Momentum trading strategy increases expected return and lowers risk due to low correlation between both factors/anomalies.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of ETFs and local futures of 66 countries. Summary book to market ratios is calculated for each market from book to market ratios of stocks. Countries are then sorted on calculated country B/M ratios. The investor takes 30% of countries with the highest country B/M ratios and goes long 30% of them with the highest performance over the last 12 months. He then takes 30% of countries with the lowest country B/M ratios and goes short 30% of them with the lowest performance over the last 12 months. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly, and countries are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.