The low-risk anomaly is a phenomenon when assets with low (high) risk, measured by beta, or volatility earn positive (negative) excess returns relative to the CAPM of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965). Ang, Hodrick, Xing, and Zhang (2006) were the first to find a negative relationship between expected return and idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL). They discuss that earlier studies reporting a positive IVOL effect either do not examine IVOL at the individual-stock level or do not sort directly on IVOL. This study examines the IVOL effect in the cross-section of equities sorted by the level of mispricing. The mispricing is proxied by the measure of Stambaugh et al. (2012, 2015) that averages each stock’s rankings associated with 11 return anomalies that survive the adjustment for the three factors of Fama and French (1993). Based on the mispricing measure, authors sort the stocks into quintiles and then, within each quintile, into the five value-weighted portfolios according to their IVOL. The resulting 25 mispricing-risk portfolios have shown that portfolios within the low (high) mispricing quintile exhibit positive (negative) returns. The prevailing relationship becomes more (less) significant with the increasing (decreasing) IVOL. For example, within the highest mispricing quintile, the high-risk portfolio underperformed the low-risk portfolio by 1.68% per month adjusted for the FF3 factors, which is statistically significant at the 1% level. Naturally, going long on the low-risk mispriced stocks while shorting the high-risk mispriced stocks results in a profitable trading strategy. A portfolio based on the IVOL effect achieved a 22.13% annualized FF3 alpha with a corresponding risk-adjusted return of 1.28.

Fundamental reason
The IVOL effect is based on the two well-known concepts, namely arbitrage risk, and arbitrage asymmetry. Idiosyncratic volatility represents an arbitrage risk that discourages arbitrage and the subsequent reduction of mispricing. Therefore, stocks with high (low) IVOL are more (less) susceptible to mispricing. On the other hand, the arbitrage asymmetry is a willingness of an investor to devote more capital to long positions as opposed to the short positions when exploiting the security mispricing. Stambaugh, Robert F., and Yu, Jianfeng and Yuan, Yu (2014) explain that the sizes of institutions as hedge funds engaged in shorting are small in aggregate compared to the mutual funds and other institutions that do not short. Thus, arbitrage eliminates more underpricing than overpricing due to the greater amount of arbitrage capital devoted to long positions compared to short positions. As a result, the negative IVOL effect among overpriced stocks is stronger than the positive IVOL effect among underpriced stocks. On average, the negative IVOL effect dominates and creates the observed negative relationship between the IVOL and expected return. Moreover, the overall negative IVOL effect on expected return becomes more (less) significant following high (low) investor sentiment.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks in the CRSP database. At the beginning of each month, sort stocks into quintiles based on the mispricing measure of Stambaugh et al. (2012), Stambaugh et al. (2015), and Stambaugh and Yuan (2017), obtained from the website of Robert Stambaugh (http://finance.wharton.upenn.edu/~stambaug/). Then, within each quintile, sort stocks into the five value-weighted portfolios according to their idiosyncratic volatility. For each stock, compute the idiosyncratic volatility as a standard deviation of the residuals in a regression of stock’s daily returns in a recent month on the three factors defined by Fama and French (1993): MKT, SMB, and HML. Within the highest mispricing quintile, buy the portfolio with the lowest idiosyncratic volatility and sell the portfolio with the highest idiosyncratic volatility. The resulting portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide information regarding this topic.