Factor investing is a strategy that chooses securities on attributes that are associated with higher returns. There are two main types of factors that have driven returns of stocks, bonds, and other factors: macroeconomic factors and style factors. The former captures broad risks across asset classes while the latter aims to explain returns and risks within asset classes. While factor theory is robust, the practical implementation immediately runs into real-world problems. Firstly, short selling is restricted and often not permitted for retail investors. Alternative mechanisms to short selling are expensive and come with execution risks that are not accounted for in the factor theory portfolio. Secondly, market liquidity is a real constraint. Therefore, practical implementations often deliver different (and often lower) returns than what the theory would suggest. This novel research paper studies an increasingly popular factor strategy in the US market – the quality factor strategy, but in the Indian market. Accessing factors cheaply is almost tough for most non-institutional investors in India as there are no ETFs which offer such specific factor exposure and mutual funds are not tailored specifically for such exposure. However, this paper proposes a long-only variation, which should be more implementable.
Quality has its roots in the fundamental analysis (Graham, 2006) but has become popular as a systematic investment style in recent years. Of all the factors, quality is perhaps the hardest to define as there is no consensus on the best way to measure it. In this paper quality stock is defined as a stock that has characteristics that should command, ceterius paribus, a higher relative price. Deriving from the Gordon Growth Model, a quality score using `off the shelf’ criteria for profitability, growth, and safety (Quality3 strategy) based on existing well-regarded research is built. The author also examines the quality strategy where the ESG is included, but we would refer to the simpler version.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the authors examine whether a stock’s quality is persistent by selecting stocks that were profitable, growing, and safe in the recent past, and analyze if these characteristics are displayed in the future. To examine the predictability of quality, two portfolios are built every quarter: a top portfolio consisting of stocks with the highest quality score, and a bottom portfolio consisting of stocks with the lowest quality scores for the period. The analysis shows the predictability and persistence of high-quality for firms three years into the future. Nextly, the portfolio earns higher than market risk-adjusted returns. The results are consistent with existing studies on the quality factor: quality stocks have a tendency to be underpriced and junk stocks overpriced by the market. The results further indicate that a long-only systematic Quality3 strategy handily outperforms the underlying NIFTY 100 Index and the volatility of the portfolio compares favourably to the market volatility despite the concentrated portfolio.
Considering the aforementioned, the combination of the three components provides significant synergies – with the Quality3 giving higher excess returns, alphas, raw shrape ratios, information ratio, and a lower beta than each component. The FF4 regression has a lower adjusted R2 for quality than any of the adjusted R2 for the individual components of profitability and growth, implying that returns on the aggregate quality factor have something more than can be explained as a simple `sum of parts’. The combination is indeed a powerful one.
Finally, the results argue that quality companies need to be regularly reviewed, and the quarterly rebalancing inherent in the construction ensures this. The strategy, therefore, has practical applications for institutional investors, as well as for non-institutional investors who would like to build long-only systematic portfolios with exposure to quality.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NIFTY100 Index stocks. Firstly, calculate the quality score on the last trading day of the month. The quality score is calculated as the z-score of the sum of profitability, growth, and safety scores. Profitability is measured as a z-score of the sum of z-scores of return on equity (ROE), return on assets (ROA), cash flow over assets (CFOA), operating margin (OPMAR), and the cash accruals over assets (ACC). Growth is measured as a z-score of the sum of z-scores of the three-year growth in ROE, ROA, CFOA and the number of times that OPMAR has not decreased in the last three years. The safety is measured as a z-score of the sum of z-scores of low beta (BAB), low volatility (VOL), low leverage (LEV), high cashflow leverage (CFLEV) and low ROE volatility (EVOL). The beta measure is based on the product of the rolling one-year daily return standard deviation and the rolling five-year three-day return correlations (as in Frazzini and Pedersen (2014)). Volatility is measured as the variance of daily returns over a rolling one year (252 days). Past three years data are used to compute the z-scores. The portfolio consists of the top 12 of NIFTY100 Index constituents stocks ranked by the quality score as of the last trading day of the respective quarter. Portfolios are equally-weighted and quarterly rebalanced.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It is a long only equity strategy.