The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) provides the first theoretically motivated measure of the riskiness of each asset and the expected return it should command in equilibrium. Early empirical tests of the model showed that low beta stocks have consistently positive risk-adjusted returns and vice versa. This anomaly is known as the beta anomaly. One of the investment strategies that exploit this anomaly is known as the “betting-against-beta” (BAB). The basic principle of this strategy is buying low-beta stocks and shorting high-beta stocks. Additional actual academic research builds on top of that basic strategy by examining time-varying volatility to time BAB anomaly. There are months with extremely high risk for the strategy which are followed by lower returns on average. The large economic benefits of risk-scaling are similar to those of momentum and set these two anomalies apart from other equity factors. The benefits come from strong predictability in risk and the absence of a risk-return trade-off.

Fundamental reason
Decomposing the risk of BAB into the market and specific risk academic paper finds that the predictable part is the specific one. Also, the performance of a strategy scaled by specific risk only is very similar to one using total risk. So academic paper concludes that specific risk is causing the gains of risk management.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks traded on NYSE. The BAB portfolio is constructed based on the principles of Frazini and Pedersen as following: securities with a low beta factor are long, and securities with a high beta factor are short. To construct each BAB factor, all securities in an asset class are ranked in ascending order on the basis of their estimated beta. The ranked securities are assigned to one of two portfolios. The low- (high-) beta portfolio is composed of all stocks with a beta below (above) its asset class median. The BAB is the self-financing zero-beta portfolio. This implies having more than one dollar in the long leg and less than one dollar in the short leg. The diﬀerence is funded by a short position in the risk-free rate asset (T-bills) such that the overall portfolio has zero cost. In each portfolio, securities are weighted by the ranked betas (i.e., lower-beta securities have larger weights in the low-beta portfolio, and higher beta securities have larger weights in the high-beta portfolio).
The exact process of composing the risk-weighted portfolio is stated on page 8. The realized volatility is used to forecast the volatility for the next period and also to scale the returns to achieve a given target of volatility. The realized volatility is computed from daily returns in the previous 21 sessions for each month and factor. The goal of volatility is at the level of 12%. To meet the goal of desired volatility, the portfolio is weighted by the realized volatility in the previous month. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Low beta stocks (low-risk stocks) are usually safer during turmoil and Beta Factor in a long-short variant can be used as a portfolio hedge against equity risk. However caution should be used as the popularity of betting-against-beta investing could move valuation (measured by common valuation ratios like P/E, P/B, P/CF etc.) of low beta stocks into excessive-high (compared to neutral market valuation). This popularity of betting-against-beta factor investing and high valuation of low beta stocks can be then detrimental to their performance during market stress.