The momentum anomaly (the tendency of stocks that have performed well in the past continue to perform well in the future and vice versa) is one of the most well-known and persistent anomalies in the world. Yet, the anomaly is still connected with a lot of academic interest what results in a lot of practical modifications that can be used in real practice.

One of the possible and according to this paper, also working modification is the combination of the traditional momentum and buy-side competition. Although the construction of the buy-side competition is quite complicated, the results suggest that the usage of the competition measure could be largely beneficial. The momentum returns of low competition funds are statistically and economically signiﬁcant with the return of 139 basis points per month. On the other hand, the corresponding return for the high competition portfolio is only eight basis points per month, and this small economic magnitude is not statistically different from zero. Addítíonally, the competition measure is computed using large mutual funds holding U.S. stocks. Therefore the investment universe naturally becomes the universe of large-cap stocks. According to the authors, mutual funds are more active and more likely to be the marginal investors in these stocks. Hence, proﬁt opportunities in momentum investing and the eﬀect of competition between funds are more likely to be seen in this subsample. Moreover, from the practitioner’s point of view, larger stocks can be easily traded and are connected with greater liquidity.

Fundamental reason
The theory says that if there are some proﬁt opportunities in the ﬁnancial markets, buy-side investors will exploit them through appropriate trading strategies. Naturally, buy-side price pressure is likely to be stronger when more investors are incorporated into the market that presents a proﬁt opportunity. Therefore, this intuition leads to defining a measure of buy-side competition for momentum proﬁts. The hypothesis of the paper is that momentum will generate larger proﬁts when the buy-side competition is low. The reason for the functionality stems from the idea that is investing rents are limited when investors compete more vigorously in the market oﬀering momentum proﬁts. No surprise, momentum should be more proﬁtable when the competition is low (and cannot be easily arbitraged away) and according to the paper, especially when rival funds have correlated signals regarding investment opportunities. Moreover, the strategy trades large-capitalization stocks, where mutual funds are likely to be the marginal investor, which gives us a way to find the competition measure. Last but not least, the hypothesis is also supported by the economic significance, since the momentum spread is 139 basis points when the buy-side competition is low but is insigniﬁcant when the competition is high.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX and Nasdaq exchanges (share codes 10 or 11). Financial ﬁrms and ﬁrms with price less than $1 at the end of the month are excluded. The first step is to obtain data on actively managed, open-ended U.S. equity mutual funds, to be able to perform the strategy (for example the data in the study comes from CRSP Survivor-Bias Free U.S. Mutual Fund database). Firstly, the investor needs to compute the momentum competition metric. The definition itself is more complicated, ťherefore we would like to advise to read the whole definition and the construction on page 11-12 (including the footnotes). However, the main idea is to at the end of month t−1, compute the returns over the interval (t−12, t−2) and standardize each stock’s return to a z-score (this can be viewed as placing each stock in a one-dimensional momentum (based on its prior return space). Nextly, each mutual fund is located in the same space based on the value-weighted location of the stocks it holds. Two funds are defined as competitors at some time t if the inter-fund distance is lower or equal as a chosen parameter to achieve a target granularity.

Finally, the competition metric used in the strategy is based on the similarity between a fund and its rivals that are spatially proximate to the fund (for the better explanation see the footnote six on page 12 where a practical example is). Lastly, the competition measure is competition averaged across all funds that hold a particular stock. The final execution is much simpler than the computation itself, at the end of each month t−1, stocks are firstly sorted into terciles by momentum competition, and then the stocks are sorted within the lowest competition tercile into quintile portfolios by their traditional 12-month month momentum. Long the highest quintile and short the lowest quintile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.