Market timing is the making of buy/sell decisions in an attempt to predict the future price movement of the market. From a portfolio standpoint, the same technique means increasing/decreasing the beta of the portfolio based on expectations of the abnormal market return. Usually, market timing strategies include two assets, risky asset – ETF based on a market index and reserve asset – most often cash. It is important to know when to switch between the two in order to get the correct market movements. The selected strategy trades country ETFs from emerging markets and is a reversal-based. Investor went long when the current month realized return is below the 3-month average. The strategy then uses inverse volatility weighting to calculate portfolio weights for each asset/country.

Fundamental reason
The standard equally-weighted approach for application of market timing strategy is usually not very successful. Predicting correctly market movements is not very valuable because the movements are small, and investors can’t get to utilize the market timing effectiveness enough. On the other hand, the same strategy augmented by volatility-weighted bets can beat the benchmark “Buy and Hold” portfolio (with no volatility-weighting). The trick is to focus on predictive ability in markets that are highly volatile and capture big returns. Weighting bets by the volatilities of the markets achieve this by tilting the bets to the more volatile markets and months with high expected volatility. It is a significant difference in performance in comparison to the traditional strategy, and using volatility-weighted bets decreases overall risk compared to standard equally-weighted market timing strategy. The strategy allows for greater exploitation of the forecasting ability to notice the bigger market movements and not waste time on small insignificant deviations that will not bring large positive returns.


Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of emerging equity markets ETFs (China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Indonesia, Phillippines, Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore, Turkey, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Romania, Poland, Lithuania). Go long ETF when the current month realized return is below the 3-month average and go to cash when the current month realized return is over the 3-month average. Weight country bets by the volatilities of the markets. The portfolio is rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only therefore it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).