Although there still is a debate about informed agents, past research identifies the strategies of informed agents as profitable. For example, short-sellers are great examples of informed agents, since they tend to be skilled in analyzing public information, while some of them may even trade on private information. Additionally, corporate insiders, including officers, directors and large shareholders of the firm, are naturally informed agents by construction. The profitability of both groups stems from the informational advantage that short-sellers and corporate insiders have over other investors. Although information about short sellers can form a profitable trading strategy as well as information about insiders, novel research proposed and examined a trading strategy that jointly considers both short selling and insider trading.
The strategy is motivated by the possibly coordinated trading behaviour of short sellers and corporate insiders, as well as the inconclusive evidence on the informational content of these informed traders. They are stating that the predictability of those opinions is strongest when they agree with each other. To be more precise, when short sellers increase their shorting activity and insiders decrease their position, the stock is likely to be overvalued, and when the short-sellers decrease their shorting activity, and insiders increase their positions, the stock is like to be undervalued. To sum it up, a simple combination of the trading information of short sellers and insiders helps to intensify the signal of informed trading. It can be used to form a profitable and both statistically, and economically (the strategy is significant if we include trading costs) significant trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, short selling is costly and not that simple the short seller needs to pay borrowing costs to the lender and fees to the broker. The aforementioned implicates that the short-sellers have an incentive to sell short only when they have superior information. Moreover, short-sellers seem to be better at analyzing public information, such as corporate news and public order flow. Secondly, corporate insiders should naturally have valuable private information about a firm’s value. This makes it clear that their trades may predict returns.
Given that short selling reflects a market perception of mispricing and that insider demand captures the manager’s beliefs with regard to the firm’s valuation, there exists a synergy in their return predictabilities. Paper has found strong evidence that aggregating information on short selling and insider trading yields a more profitable strategy than when using the information on either source on its own. It was also found that both aspects are important in shaping portfolio performance. The performance of the proposed strategy can be attributed to the informational advantage that short-sellers and corporate insiders have over other investors. Moreover, the authors hypothesize that this advantage dissipates when the informational gap between informed and uninformed investors is small. For example, this could occur in low information asymmetry environments, where the opportunity to collect data regarding firm valuation has been levelled among various investors. Scenarios, where this could happen, include an economic contraction when market-wide uncertainty makes informed trader’s information advantage less credible. Last but not least, the results are consistent with this information hypothesis.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of CRSP stocks, and the return is the market-adjusted return – the difference between the portfolio return, and the CRSP market return. To form the trading strategy, at the end of each quarter, sort the stocks into two groups, based on the directions of the changes in short interest and insider demand. Nextly, within each group, divide the stocks further into low and high subgroups, based on the median value of the change in short interest, and the median value of the change in insider demand, respectively. Lastly, two portfolios are formed: the first contains stocks with the greatest increase in short interest and the most decrease in insider demand. The second contains those stocks with the greatest decrease in short interest and the most increase in insider demand. Short the first portfolio and long the second portfolio. The strategy is rebalanced monthly, and stocks are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The short-selling strategy is a natural hedge/diversification to equity market factor during bear markets.
