The value spread is defined as the diﬀerence between the value signal in the long versus short portfolio, and this spread is strongly time-varying. For instance, in the case of individual equities, the value spread is the diﬀerence in the average book-to-market ratio of value and growth stocks. A standard deviation increase in the value spread predicts an increase in the expected value return in the same order of magnitude or even more as the unconditional value premium. While using the value spread, returns of the value strategies for individual equities, commodities, currencies, global government bonds and stock indexes are predictable in the time series. This predictability is strongly signiﬁcant and economically large. However, research concludes that value-investing is attractive only if the value spread in an asset class is high relative to both its historical average and other asset classes. A profitable investment strategy using the spread of the value can be constructed for any of the previously mentioned asset classes. Still, our focus would be centred around equities (more information about other asset classes can be found in the paper).

Fundamental reason
Firstly, for an interpretation of the time-variation in the value spread of stocks, if the value spread is zero, value stocks are cheaper than growth stocks by their historical average amount. A positive value spread indicates that value stocks are cheaper than normal, and the cross-section of value measures is wide, and on the other hand, a negative value spread indicates the opposite. The predictability is strongly signiﬁcant and economically large, both in isolation or in the pool of value strategies. Moreover, coeﬃcient estimates suggest that expected value returns vary by at least as much as their unconditional level. Common and asset-class-speciﬁc components of the value spread contribute about equally to this predictability. Authors argue that the source of the common variation in the value returns is compensation for risk. Lastly, to benchmark the strength of the value return predictability, the in-sample relation between value returns and the lagged value spread is slightly stronger than the relation between aggregate stock returns and the dividend yield.

Simple trading strategy
Firstly, the investment universe consists of the largest stocks whose market capitalizations cumulate to 75% of total market capitalization in the CRSP ﬁle (263 stocks on average). To measure the value of each ﬁrm i, the industry-adjusted book-to-market ratios (BM i,t, Ind.adj.) are used. Those BMs are calculated by subtracting from the each BM i,t the value-weighted average book-to-market ratio of the industry where stock i does belong. Using the value measures, a set of value strategy returns is constructed from the portfolio sorts. For individual stocks, value-weighted decile portfolios are formed each month by sorting on BM i,t, Ind.adj. The value stock portfolio is defined as decile 10 (high) and the growth stock portfolio as decile 1 (low).

Nextly, the value spread is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the average value signal in the high and low portfolio ( VSt[H-L] = Vt[H]-Vt[L] where the symbols in brackets are denoting the type of portfolio – this equation can be found at page 11).

A linear timing strategy is constructed for value in individual equities by constructing a value spread that is standardized in month t using only historical information. Value spread that is standardized in month t (VSt, His) is equal to the difference of two sums divided by the standard deviation of VS1:t-12, the first sum sums from s=0 to 11 VSt-s divided by the 12 and the second sum sums from s=12 to t-1 VSt-s divided by the t-12. Moreover, cut oﬀ the standardized signal at ±2. The spread indicates whether the average value spread over the last twelve months is historically large. Linear timing strategy invests VSt, His dollars long or short accordingly to the signal and strategy is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.