From an investor’s viewpoint, holding the most convex stocks in a few critical market phases can mitigate portfolio losses. In this spirit, the authors resolve to investigate gamma drivers in an empirical framework. Despite varying gamma regimes over the period, authors demonstrate that past volatility and the price-to-book ratio have been the most efficient discriminant features of concavity and convexity. Analyzing the correlations between traditional Fama-French factors and the XMA factor (long convexity, short concavity) corroborates this idea. Building on those results, they attempt to forecast the XMA premium. The result is an interesting systematic long-only market-timing convexity trading strategy that long-term investors might also use, and we include it in our encyclopedia.

Fundamental reason
A decade of unconventional monetary policy has led to reflection upon its consequences on asset pricing; the fall in the risk-free rate was accompanied by a sustained drop in the equity risk premium, dampening expected returns on the asset class. In the meantime, risk aversion and market uncertainty diminished. However, at the dawn of the normalization of monetary policy, a decoupling between peaking risk aversion and realized volatility, which remained fairly contained, was observed in 2021. These effects combined make the case for convexity exposure more topical than ever. Namely, stocks with volatile past returns from companies that are rather classified as glamorous (as opposed to value) tend to have higher gammas. Applying a cointegrating vector framework, authors find that it exhibits long-term relationships with the VIX, as expected from gamma’s essence, but also with short-term interest rates and oil prices. Increasing short-term interest rates and market volatility are conducive to the outperformance of the convexity premium in the subsequent period. This result is robust to a varying sample. In particular, it cushions the correction in periods of market stress, as illustrated during the COVID-19 pandemic. In an environment characterized by monetary policy normalization, rising volatility, and risk aversion, combined with low expected returns on equity, authors are convinced of the value added of a long convexity exposure to preserve portfolio value. The framework they propose for this strategy, relying solely on a couple of past macroeconomic and financial metrics, could easily be translated from a monthly to a daily signal as well. In fact, their gamma estimates are based on past stock returns, but a forecast of gamma’s turning points at the stock level could also be considered. Besides, modeling conditional gamma based on bull and bear markets may suit portfolio managers with different convictions or investing styles.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks from MSCI World (index), and (exchange-traded) fund (ETF) replicating itself (for example iShares MSCI World UCITS ETF | IWRD for European investors).
Fundamental data are retrieved from the FactSet Fundamentals database. Inflation data are retrieved from the OECD Database, the authors calculate SLOPE between 2Y and 10Y rates from their data, and data for Shanghai Stock Exchange Index are obtained from FactSet. All the other variables derive from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and are retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis database.)
Authors decided to employ Fama and French (1992)’s traditional framework to build an XMA factor, namely a factor that is long convex stocks and short concave ones. Authors define gamma as the co-skewness (convexity) with Fama&French market factor (equation 3, page 6).
Authors build a long convexity systematic strategy based on XMA factor forecast estimated via OLS and are using XMA factor returns as the response (dependent) variable. They do univariate regressions where the dependent variable is the average gamma of the MSCI World (for stocks with a significant gamma at 5% level) and regress each macroeconomic or financial variable from Table 4 as predictor (independent) variable.
Each month t in the out-of-sample period, they use the signal of the t + 1 forecasts from Model (1) to decide:
a) that we should invest in convex stocks and only hold the top gamma of MSCI World decile if XMA forecast is above 0
b) otherwise we should hold the MSCI World index
Strategy is rebalanced each month.
Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The gamma factor can be directly used as a hedge against drawdowns on equity markets. That’s the main message of the whole source research paper.