No doubt, momentum is a widespread anomaly among both investors and academics. The latter group keeps coming with new and enhanced momentum ideas, which is also the case of this, novel research. It is a well-known fact that momentum can be formed by using various lookback periods. From a practical point of view, there is heterogeneity among investors caused by their opinions and preferences. From the theoretical point of view, a lot of effort has been made to find the optimal length or to optimize the choice of lookback periods, for example, by using machine learning methods. After all, investors tend to prefer different lookback periods, which causes the heterogeneity as mentioned earlier. While some branch of research studies the optimal period, this novel research examines a different situation.

This paper analyses the stocks for which the more extended momentum (one year) and shorter momentum (six months) overlap. The finding is that the stocks in the intersection of the winners-minus losers portfolios of two formation periods mentioned above generate most of the short-term returns of the simple momentum strategy based on a single formation period. As a result, this idea can be utilized efficiently by omitting the less profitable (non-overlapping) stocks from the portfolio. The results suggest that the effect is more substantial for the longer holding periods, for example, for the one-month holding period, the return is only slightly larger, and the strategy is more volatile.

On the other hand, the difference between simple momentum strategy and overlapping for one year holding period is much more economically and statistically significant. Last but not least, the results for various holding periods can be found in the paper (in table 3). In general, the more extended period is connected with a more significant difference between overlapping and traditional momentum.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the functionality of overlapping momentum is conditioned by the functionality of the pure momentum. The most common explanations and probably the main reasons for the persistence of the momentum anomaly are behavioural biases like investor herding, investor over and underreaction, and lastly, the confirmation bias. The authors attribute the enhanced returns of the overlapping momentum (OMOM) strategy to the overlapping stocks being in the radar of momentum investors with various formation periods. However, if the momentum can be attributed to the investor herding, overlapping stocks should be naturally connected with even bigger herding. Additionally, using overlapping momentum signals double “checks” the trend, ensuring that the past winners are true past winners and loser are true past losers. Usage of longer and shorter trend-following or momentum indicator is a well-known technique that is also included in our screener. Comparing the OMOM strategy with a simple momentum strategy, the OMOM is more profitable even in the presence of common risk factors as in the CAPM, the Fama-French 3-factor model, and the Fama-French 5-factor model. Furthermore, returns of overlapping strategy are in general less exposed to market risk, downside risk or tail risk. Last but not least, the OMOM strategy has better performance even in the presence of transaction costs.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). Stocks with a price lower than one USD are dropped. Firstly, calculate the 12-months and 6-months momentum (thee cumulative monthly return) omitting the last month to avoid short-term return reversals. Secondly, stocks are sorted into deciles based on their 12-months and 6-months momentum. Long the stocks that are in both 6-months and 12-months top deciles. Short the stocks that are in both 6-months and 12-months bottom deciles. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced yearly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.