Arbitrage on ETF twins is the practice of taking advantage of the price difference between two ETFs, which have similar economic fundaments (nature) but are created by different providers or listed on different markets. Trades are done intraday, and traders try to capture small spreads in price between the pairs of ETFs. Arbitrage isn’t risk-free, but it is very close to it; therefore, spreads tend to close very fast after their creation. The main risk for this type of arbitrage is the actions of “noise” traders. They could cause prices to diverge substantially further (as happened, for example, during the flash crash on May 2010) rather than converge.

Fundamental reason
ETFs have the ability to track the underlying index closely. This is their important aspect, so the management of each ETF fund has an incentive to minimize tracking error. But an ETFs’ price deviations from the price of the underlying happen quite often. The trustees of ETFs are permitted to allow a certain amount of “misweighting” between each stock in the fund and the underlying index each day. It is, therefore, possible that the price of each ETF does not accurately reflect the value of the underlying securities. These deviations are sometimes large enough to create the opportunity to buy undervalued ETF and sell overvalued ETF, trying to capture the spread and locking in a profit.

Simple trading strategy
Two ETFs are used – the SPY, listed on NYSE, and IUSA, listed on the Swiss Stock Exchange. Trades are done only when both exchanges are open. The arbitrage opportunity is identified if bid SPY / ask IUSA ≥ 1.002 or bid IUSA / ask SPY ≥ 1.002. An arbitrage opening trade is initiated, and the overvalued ETF is shorted, and the undervalued ETF is bought. Positions are maintained until the IUSA bid (or ask) and SPY ask (or bid) converge, after which trade is terminated. On average, there are 40 trades a year.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Arbitrage with ETF Twins is related to other arbitrage/reversal strategies – it is also a type of “liquidity providing” strategy, and as such, it usually benefits from increased volatility or a drop in liquidity and performs well during market crises. However, source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, rigorous backtest is recommended …