Low-volatility anomaly (also known as the volatility effect) is a widely recognized market anomaly based on the fact that even though the standard asset-pricing models state otherwise, equities with low volatility can outperform highly volatile ones. There are, however, many more trading strategies tied to volatility, as it is an important price indicator. Because of this, it is no surprise that being able to capture volatility well is in the interest of both academics and traders alike. There are various ways of measuring it, but in this paper, the authors propose a new way to approximate the total volatility, called the return range. They define return range as the difference between the daily maximum and the daily minimum in the index’s price within the previous month. This new measure, as they show, is highly correlated with standard deviation and so possible to use as a proxy for the total volatility. However, the return range is simpler to compute than the other volatility measures because it requires less data.
They find that the return range can predict returns on international industry indexes. Namely, it seems that small-cap equities with high return range significantly outperform small-caps with low return range, and the effect is converse in the largest size quintile. This means that the low volatility effect is present only in the big-cap international industry indexes. Based on these findings, a bivariate long-short portfolio strategy is proposed, which sorts the indexes first according to the size, and then according to their return range.

Fundamental reason
It has been shown that the maximum and the minimum daily return values within the previous month have significant predictive power for the subsequent returns on the stock level. Authors show that by combining them into a single measure ‘return range,’ they obtain a measure that is highly correlated with the standard deviation. Thus the return range can serve as a proxy for the total volatility. They find that the strategy that longs high return range small-caps and shorts low return range small-caps, while doing the converse for the large-caps is profitable, and the effect is driven mainly by the small capitalization indexes.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of industry indexes in the countries Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United States, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, India, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, the Philippines, Poland, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, and Turkey.
Split the portfolio into equal-weighted quintiles according to the market capitalization. Calculate the sorting variable ‘range’ as the daily maximum minus the daily minimum within the previous month. Within each quintile, sort the stocks according to ‘range’. In the small-cap portfolio, long the stocks with high ‘range’ value, short the stocks with low ‘range’ value. In the large-cap portfolio do the converse – long low ‘range’ stocks, short high ‘range’ stocks. Rebalance monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - no mention of performance in stress times.