The Cyclically Adjusted Price-to-Earnings ratio (CAPE) is one of the most common indicators of the stock market attractiveness. CAPE measures a stock’s price relative to the company’s earnings per share, but contrary to the classical P/E ratio, it averages the earnings over 10 years in the past. This paper shows the relevance of this indicator.
The inverse value of CAPE is known as the Cyclically-Adjusted Earnings Yield (Earnings Yield). Historical research has proved that it is a good predictor of real returns and came up with the simple rules on how to use Earnings Yield to dynamically allocate between US stocks and US T-bills. It says to be proportional to the Earnings Yield at each point in time, set the equity allocation to an average of 65%, and restrict it to be between 0% and 100% (no shorting and no leverage). Although this allocation is reasonable, it comes up with several problems. The authors proposed several changes to improve this strategy and replaced T-Bills with US Inflation-indexed bonds (TIPS).
The strategy tells us how to calculate the optimal fraction of the portfolio to allocate to equities using Merton Rule. The optimal fraction is proportional to the excess of the stock market’s Earnings Yield above the real yield of TIPS and is inversely proportional to risk and the level of the risk aversion.

Fundamental reason
According to past research, high CAPE indicates a low expected return of the stock market. The prediction ability of this indicator is explained by investor psychology (e.g. investors overreact to the growth aspect of growth stocks). In addition, the advantage of CAPE over the P/E ratio is the fact, that it increases the power of prediction while it smoothes out the fluctuations of earnings. Last but not least, the utilization of risk and risk aversion increases the functionality of the strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P 500 and US inflation-protected bonds (TIPS). Firstly, calculate „Excess Earnings Yield“ which represents the excess of the stock market’s Earnings Yield above the real yield of TIPS. Subsequently, estimate the risk (volatility) in the time of the asset allocation decision and determine the level of risk aversion as a degree of Constant Relative Risk-Aversion (CRRA). Finally, using the Merton Rule calculate the optimal fraction of the portfolio to allocate to equities, which is proportional to the Excess Earnings Yield and inversely proportional to the risk and the level of risk aversion.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - the author does not implicitly suggest any hedges against bear markets.