Both time-series momentum and carry are already well-known strategies which are well-documented. Time-series momentum is a strategy that buys instruments with positive returns over the last 12 months and sells instruments with negative returns over the last 12 months; this strategy produces attractive performance across a wide spectrum of assets – equity indices, ﬁxed income, currencies and commodities. In the past, research has established a link between basis and the carry trade by documenting that the basis is an important component of the expected returns of securities. The basis is predictive in the cross-section and time-series across the four major asset classes (equity indices, ﬁxed income, currencies and commodities) and can be captured by a long-short carry trade that shorts low-carry instruments, and longs high-carry instruments. At first glance, time-series momentum and carry seem to be two distinct risk premia with a lack of a clear link between them. However, the aforementioned is far from reality. Research proved that the basis explains approximately one-third of the unconditional return of the time-series momentum. There is a link between time-series momentum and carry trade. Naturally, this link can be exploited in a trading strategy by conditioning the momentum on the basis, where the time-series momentum strategy that generates signals conditioned on the sign of the basis outperforms unconditional time-series momentum with the large improvement in the Sharpe ratio. Moreover, this is primarily driven by superior performance during market crises – the times when investors have higher marginal utility.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the regression results indicate that the basis is an important contributor to the performance of time-series momentum. Long-only time-series momentum is positively correlated to the basis, and on the other hand, there is a negative relation between short-only time-series momentum signals and basis. The impact of the basis on the performance of time-series momentum seems to be quite intuitive since basis contributes to the direction of the trend that time-series momentum attempts to capture. The impact of the basis on individual asset classes is mixed but persistent and positive. The total contribution ranges from 8% for equities to over 50% for ﬁxed income, with an average contribution of approximately 36% across the four assets. Thus, the basis is a signiﬁcant contributor to the performance of time-series momentum, which explains approximately a third of its returns. Focusing on the conditional strategy, the Sharpe ratio of time-series momentum conditioned on the sign of the basis delivers the Sharpe ratio of 0,92. This result is superior to the Sharpe ratio of the unconditional time-series momentum strategy (0,75) at the 1% signiﬁcance level. Moreover, conditioning the signals of time-series momentum on basis results in a consistent improvement in the performance regardless of the choice of the lookback period in the calculation of basis and the results are not driven by a single time period or environment. Last but not least, this conditioning of time-series momentum signals on the sign of basis adds the most value in both economic and statistical terms during crisis periods.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 65 futures. Commodities (28 securities), Equity Indices (12 securities), Fixed Income (18 securities) and Foreign Exchange (7 securities), the full list can be found on page 38. Firstly, the basis of market i at time t is deﬁned as the logarithmic diﬀerence between the spot price and the futures contract, annualized by multiplying by 365 and divided by the number of calendar days between the expirations of the two futures contracts (equation 1, page 6). Secondly, the investor would use a time-series momentum conditioned on the sign of basis. Take a long position in securities with positive time-series momentum (calculated using the past 12 months) limited to securities with a positive basis. On the other hand, take a short position in securities with negative time-series momentum limited to securities with a negative basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Futures trend-following/momentum strategies are a cornerstone of trend-following CTA funds and as such is an excellent candidate for an uncorrelated strategy and very often a hedge to equity market factor. The source research paper doesn’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; however, we can expect that strategy will probably retain a negative correlation to equities. Backtest would be helpful to determine correlation and hedging characteristics.