Abbreviation ESG stands for environmental, social, and governance. These are the three dimensions investors might want to consider when they engage in socially responsible investing (SRI), supporting their values while creating a profit. SRI has been gaining popularity in recent years, and by the start of the last year, around 40% of professionally managed assets incorporated SRI to some extent. This strategy focuses on the social dimension of ESG, using employee satisfaction as an indicator of a reliable firm, which performs well in both good and bad (crisis) times.
Employee satisfaction is yearly measured by a ranking called “100 Best Companies to Work for in America”. This list has been used in a famous paper by Edmans (2011). This research finds that his results still hold even when tested on a more extended sample of data with different factor models. Even though the premium became slightly lower, employee satisfaction is still being undervalued by the market. That means it can be used to create a long-only trading strategy based on this ranking and get significant results.

Fundamental reason
It seems that investors still undervalue financially material, social responsibility efforts. Additionally, it is theorized that keeping employees happy creates higher productivity and willingness to pull together through bad times. Another of the potential reasons for the outperformance of this SRI might be that investors tend to use negative screening, excluding irresponsible companies instead of focusing on the good ones. The authors test the strategy on a 36-year sample, and it holds when tested by various factor models (the 6-factor model of Fama and French (2018), q4-factor model of Hou et al. (2014), q5-factor model of Hou et al. (2020), and AQR 6-factor model (Frazzini and Pedersen 2014; Asness et al. 2019)). The alphas are significant across various versions of the strategy (Table 6). Furthermore, it holds in both equally-weighted and value-weighted portfolios, so micro caps don’t drive the results.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of firms listed on the “100 Best Companies to Work for in America” ranking, yearly created by the Great Place to Work Institute. The ranking is announced and published each year in Fortune around mid-January. On the first day of the month following the release of the ranking (1st February), an equal-weighted portfolio is created from the firms listed. Strategy is long-only and rebalanced yearly following the publication of the list.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Although the authors state that the strategy has abnormal returns during crises, it would still suffer during crises (Figure 4). Moreover, it is a long-only strategy with significant market beta (Table 3).