China has the world’s second-largest stock market, helping to finance an economy that some predict will be the world’s largest within a decade. China also has political and economic environments quite different from those in the US and other developed economies. Furthermore, the State Council of China’s office of financial stability and development committee announced new measures in 2019 to further open up the country’s financial markets. As a result, international investors are increasingly able to participate in the Chinese stock market.
Using Chinese stock market data, the authors investigate the asset pricing implications of Jiang et al (2020) distribution-based measure of stock return asymmetry, which is defined as the probability difference between the upper and lower tails of a particular return distribution. The authors suggest that higher upside asymmetry is linked with poorer average returns in the cross-section based on this asymmetry measure (similar to the skewness effect). However, the existing factor models in China, such as the CAPM and the four-factor model (CH-4), are not able to explain the negative asymmetry effect on expected returns. As a result, the authors propose a new asymmetry factor (ASYM) that is well-priced in the Chinese stock returns cross-section. The ASYM factor is defined as the difference in average returns between the two highest and two lowest idiosyncratic asymmetries (IE) portfolios. In terms of all the measures typically used for model comparison, such as the Sharpe ratio, the number of anomalies explained, the average, t values, and the GRS test statistic, considerably enhance their asset pricing performance, thanks to this new component, the three- and four-factor models with ASYM. To conclude, of all the models the authors examined, the CH-4+ASYM five-factor model performs the best.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the logic behind the investors’ behavioral bias. If IE is positive, the likelihood of extreme profits exceeds the chance of extreme losses. Therefore, investors would overreact to this news and choose extraordinary gains over severe losses if all other factors were equal. Consequently, investors bid up the price of a stock with a high probability of extreme profits and at the same time pay a lower price for stocks with a high chance of severe losses. As a result, the expected returns are much lower when IE is larger if all other factors were equal.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese A-share stocks with common shares from the CSMAR database. Exclude stocks that are in the financial industry, stocks listed for less than six months, those with less than 15 trading days available for the previous month or have less than 120 trading days available for the past 12 months. Each month, the smallest 30% stocks are also excluded to avoid shell value contamination.
Firstly, estimate daily return residuals for each stock for six months using the regression equation with intercept, market excess returns and squared market excess returns from month t-6 to t-1 (see equation 3). Secondly, based on the distribution of the residuals, calculate the idiosyncratic asymmetry (IE) (see equation 1) using the empirical distribution function/empirical density function. IE is defined as the difference in the cumulative probability of extremely large gains and losses. The probabilities are calculated at two standard deviations away from the mean. Choose the variable c so that this condition is fulfilled. If IE is positive, the likelihood of extreme profits exceeds the chance of extreme losses.
The trading strategy goes long for the low IE and short for the high IE. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source research paper doesn’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.