Past research has identified that linked firms through industry or for example, patents influence each other and if the performance of linked firms is great, it is expected that the focal firm will also perform in such way, and vice versa. This novel research has found another possible link – offshore sales networks (OSN). The idea is based on the globalization of economies and the fact that in 2017, 43.6% of the revenue earned by S&P 500 companies was from foreign countries. Naturally, if the foreign countries overlap, industry peers are exposed to the same regional shocks. However, OSN is hard to identify by potential investors because of the regularization. Firms do not have an obligation to report sales data by disaggregated geographic regions. As a result, this could lead to a predictable return across firms with the overlap in sales overseas, where the stock price of the focal firm would adjust with a lag to shocks experienced by industry peers with similar offshore exposure. For the identification of firms’ foreign sales activities, authors in the paper follow the methodology used to construct the Hoberg and Moon (HM) Offshoring Repository (2017, 2019). By a textual analysis of the firm’s annual reports (10-K), it is possible to identify foreign countries mentioned in the report and also the nature of activities (input or output), since we are interested only in the sales (output) activities. The identification allows measuring the similarity of offshore sales between two firms and weight the returns of linked firms to the focal firm. Since the focal firm should with a lag, experience the same regional shocks, this leads to a long-short strategy, where the focal firms with the largest return of linked firms are long, and focal firms with the lowest return of linked firms are short.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, industry peers that overlap in overseas sales destinations are exposed to the same regional economic and political shocks, that affects their activities and as a result, also the stock prices. Probably the main reason, according to the paper, are the insufficient regulatory requirements for reporting detailed foreign operations. Diverse and dynamic offshore networks and their complexity, reduce the ability of investors to identify OSN relations between firms. As a result, there is a slow incorporation of such information that could be utilized in a trading strategy. Research supports this hypothesis because authors have identified strong return predictability across OSN linked firms. Additionally, the abnormal returns cannot be explained by asset pricing models (CAPM, Carhart, FF3 and FF5). The alpha of the long-short strategy remains significant and mostly unchanged.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE/Amex/Nasdaq-listed securities with share codes 10 or 11, financial firms (SIC code beginning with 6) and firms with stock prices lower than $1 are excluded. For the identification of firms’ foreign sales activities, authors in the paper follow the methodology used to construct the Hoberg and Moon (HM) Offshoring Repository (2017, 2019). We advise to study the methodology from the HM papers, but the main idea can be easily described. The method is related to the firm’s annual reports (10-K). Firstly, one needs to capture foreign nations mentioned in a firm’s annual reports. Nextly, assess the neighbouring words to every foreign nation mentioned to determine the nature of offshore activities in that particular country. Textual analysis and the HM methodology is used to extract mentions of nations from 10-Ks. Apart from the nation’s identification, one needs to examine 25 neighbour words of each stated foreign nation to identify the offshore sales activities (HM methodology, for example, words such as Export, Customer or Sell). Nextly, the distribution of output market for firm i is given by the vector “Out” where the member k is the number of the firm’s mentions of output country k divided by the total mentions of all 177 output countries in the HM database. The proximity between firm i and j is given by the cosine similarity – dot product of the vectors divided by the multiplication of the norms of vectors. The proximity is between zero and one, where the zero means that there is a low degree of proximity and one means there is a high degree of proximity. For firm i, offshore sales network linked return is the proximity-weighted average monthly return of its TNIC industry peers – equation 1. In the sample, offshore and accounting data observed in year t are matched to stock returns of the sample firms from July year t+1 to June year t+2 to ensure that data are available. Each month, stocks are sorted into deciles based on the weighted average lagged returns of their offshore sales network linked industry peers. Long the top decile and short the bottom decile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.