The “post-earnings-announcement drift” (PEAD), which describes the phenomenon that a firm’s stock price continues to drift in the direction of earnings surprises for an extended period after quarterly earnings announcements, is one of the most puzzling financial anomalies challanging efficient market hypothesis (EMT). However, according to the authors’ research, implementing a well-suited strategy for Chinese markets utilizing past findings can capture significant alpha and may be considered by investors for exposure to Chinese markets as the average number of stocks in the portfolio is 86 and produce steady returns. The robustness of the EAJ (earnings announcement jump) strategy was tested, too, excluding stocks in the bottom 30% of firm size (often coined as “shells” — specific to Chinese markets), and statistically passed.

Fundamental reason
Although an all-encompassing explanation about the origins and properties of the PEAD remains out of sight, it is possible and always attractive to make profitable investment decisions by taking full advantage of this puzzling phenomenon. Scientists’ proposed and adjusted EAJ strategy performs better in Chinese markets and is a successful addition to the family of PEAD strategies. The Fama-French three factors have little explanatory power related to the EAJ strategy, and fundamental factors seem to have no significant effect on the EAJ strategy. Attributing some of the possible explanations to biases well-known from behavioral finance papers may be appropriate. Furthermore, it is possible to include utilizing and acting on earnings preannouncements, which even provides better results.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of: stocks in China’s A-share stock market (A-share stocks listed on the Shenzhen Stock Exchange and Shanghai Stock Exchange) and financial instruments tracking CSI 500 index. The strategy can be summarized into two steps. First, investors monitor whether stocks’ opening price of the next trading day has a 3% rise compared to the last close price when an earnings preannouncement (announcement) was released. Second, the stock is held beginning on the third day for 60 days; then sold. Simultaneously, we are short the whole Chinese market to capture alpha. This strategy is long-only for stocks, value-weighed (stocks’ weights proportional to market cap), and rebalanced dynamically.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known