The beta coefficient, one of the most common measures to evaluate a market risk, compares the volatility of an investment to the whole market volatility. Many studies have examined its potential to predict abnormal returns. However, Roy (1952) and Markowitz (1959) found that market beta could be a poor risk measure in subsequent declining markets and crashes. So they proposed a new risk measure – “down beta” calculated only from days when the stock market decreased. Unfortunately, the strategies based on this proxy stay controversial. Therefore, subsequently, Levi and Welch (2020) came up with an even more advanced risk measure – “absolute delta beta” (ADB), calculated as the absolute value of the difference between betas in rising and declining markets. The authors (Xie, Zhang, Gao, and Tan) further explored the predictive power of ADB, finding that it could be a measure of the framing effect in the stock market. Moreover, the authors state that stocks with high ADB are concentrated in retail investing, which is consistent with the theory that retail investors are more exposed to framing effects. Finally, they constructed a new trading strategy, telling us to go long low-ADB and short high-ADB portfolios.

Fundamental reason
According to the authors (Xie, Zhang, Gao, and Tan), the absolute delta beta (ADB) might be a proxy for the framing effect – the principle that investors alter the importance of different aspects of the problem when making decisions. In other words, investors prefer to avoid risk when a positive frame is given (profitable environment) but seek risk when a negative frame is presented (unprofitable environment). Therefore, the zero value of ADB suggests that investors are rational – the rising and declining beta are equal. But on the other hand, the high value of ADB corresponds to a high degree of the framing effect, which leads to low expected future returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of A-share stocks listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets. The data come from China Stock Market & Accounting Research Database (CSMAR). The authors used as the benchmark the CSI300 index.
Firstly, for each stock i, calculate an asymmetric CAPM model using the data in the month K, following the regression model (1) on page 6. The asymmetric CAPM model describes the relationship between systematic risk and expected return, considering whether the market premium is greater than 0 (the dummy variable δ = 0) or if the market premium is lesser than or equal to 0 (the dummy variable δ = 0). R_i,t is the return of stock i on day t, R_f,t is the risk-free interest rate on day t (R_i,t – R_f,t represents the market premium), R_M,t is the market return on day t, and ε_t is the residual on day t. α_i, β_1i, and β_2i are the coefficients to be estimated, where α_i explains an excess return, β_1i is the beta in declining markets, and β_2i is the difference between betas in rising and declining markets of the stock i in the month K.
Secondly, after estimating the coefficients, define the absolute delta beta for stock i in month K (ADB_i,K) as the absolute value of β_2i. Finally, sort stocks based on ADB_i,K value into 50 groups going long the portfolio with the lowest ADB_i,K and going short the portfolio with the highest ADB_i,K. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - questionable: While some claim market beta could be a poor hedge measure exactly when it was needed the most: in subsequent bear markets and crashes. The others find that plain all-days market betas predicted stock returns quite well during bear markets and crashes. That is, there is no evidence that the hedge provided by portfolios of stocks with low betas tended to collapse in bear markets.