One of the well-known documented anomaly present in the stock market is that the stocks with low price outperform stocks with a higher price. This knowledge has been recently adopted by Theodosios Athanasiadis (2020), who tried to document a similar pattern among a cross-section of future contracts by replacing the price with the notional value of the contract. As the author performs the analysis from the perspective of U.S investor, the notional value of a futures contract represents a product of underlying assets´ price multiplied by contract multiplier and exchange rate.

Although the finance theory expects the value of a contract does not have any predictive power for its future returns, the author finds the exact opposite. According to the research, notional value can be of a great use since it is able to predict the cross-section of futures returns. It was found, that the low notional value contracts outperform high notional value contracts within government bonds, short-term rates, commodities, currencies, and equity indexes. More importantly, a multi-asset portfolio that went long (short) on the contracts with the low (high) notional value generated an average annual return of 3,38% from 1990 to 2019.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the strategy cannot be explained by the common and widely used benchmarks in the corresponding asset classes or by factor such as value, momentum, defensive. Only the strategy for fixed income can be related to the factors mentioned above. Apart from fixed income, each strategy has a statistically and economically significant alpha.
The premium of low notional value contracts can be explained mainly by the lower liquidity of these contracts. The author was able to document a positive cross-sectional relationship between notional contract value and illiquidity proxy. Contracts with high notional value are more liquid and vice versa, contracts with low notional value are less liquid. Additionally, also a volatility risk can be considered as a partial explanation, since low notional value contracts exhibit higher volatility.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of futures contracts for 26 equity indexes, 15 government bonds, 10 short-term interest rates, 13 cross-currency pairs and 51 commodities (specified in Table 1). If there are multiple contracts for the same underlying asset, select the most active contract based on the dollar volume. Nextly, consider only the front-month contracts that are the most liquid. When the next months´ contract becomes more liquid, roll to this contract. The data for future contracts are obtained from Refinitiv Datastream and CQG. The exchange rates for contracts denominated in foreign currency are collected from WM/Reuters.
For each asset class, rank the respective contracts by their notional value where contract with the highest notional value has the lowest rank (contrary to prevalence of ranking from lowest to highest in the other literature or in mathematics and statistics; we have contacted the author to confirm this ranking). The notional value of a futures contract represents a product of underlying assets´ price multiplied by contract multiplier and exchange rate. For each asset class, create a long/short portfolio from all contracts, where the weight of particular contract is determined as its rank minus the average rank of all contracts from this asset class multiplied by a constant to ensure that the weights of long (short) sum to 1 (-1).
Finally, the portfolios (for each asset class) are combined into a multi-asset portfolio using equal volatility weighting. Each portfolio is weighted by 10% divided by its ex-ante rolling 3-month volatility. Therefore, the volatility contribution of each portfolio in the combined portfolio is equal. The strategy is rebalanced daily.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on the Figure 3, Panel B. The performance of the composite strategy seems to be stable and mostly unrelated to the known major crises.