The Efficient-market hypothesis taught us that in a fully efficient market, the prices of assets should fully reflect their fundamental value. However, outside of the theory, the investors have to cope with various trading frictions and capital constraints, resulting in assets price deviation from its inner value. If a group of financial institutions trade in the same way collectively over multiple periods and arbitrageurs are not able to counter the trades, the price deviations could grow over a time and in the end, the particular assets returns might be a subject of reversal.
This effect has been recently studied in the paper from James G. Bulsiewicz (2020). He investigated, whether the long-term institutional trades are related to future returns and if long-term institutional trades contain any other information about future returns than those, that are already available in common short-term institutional trades measures. Each quarter, the author calculates changes in long term institutional trades of particular stocks by scaling the cumulative net trades over the past ten quarters with shares outstanding at the start of the period. The subsequent results show the presence of a negative relation between long-term institutional trades and future returns. A value-weighted long-short decile portfolio that goes long on stocks with the highest decrease in institutional trades and short on stocks with the highest increase in institutional trades would earn an annual return of 8,24% from 1980 to 2010.

Fundamental reason
The results of the study are consistent with the hypothesis that prolonged institutional buying or selling produces large deviations from fundamentals. Purchasing stocks with improving fundamentals and selling those with declining fundamental leads to a momentum effect, which causes financial institutions trade in the same direction over multiple periods. Subsequently, shifts in firm fundamentals lead to a large reversal in both institutional trades and returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the CRSP database stocks, whose value is between $5 and $1,000. At the beginning of a quarter, the investor sorts the stocks by the Long-term Institutional Trades (LIT). LIT is defined as the cumulative net trades by financial institutions over the prior 10 quarters, scaled by shares outstanding at the start of the period. Data necessary to construct institutional ownership and other related variables are obtained from the Thomson Reuters Institutional Holdings (13F) database. Then, the investor goes long on decile of stocks with the highest decrease in institutional trades and short on decile of stocks with the highest increase in institutional trades. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced quarterly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Based on the inspection of Figure 1 in the paper, the strategy would be immune to the global financial crisis and the dot-com bubble, but it still is a long-short equity strategy.