It is well-shown that the Chinese stock market differs in many ways from the other markets. One of the examples would be momentum and reversal effects – while proven and studied in the western markets, these factors are still under debate in China, where they seem to be inconsistent. This research finds no substantial evidence for the permanence of the momentum factor in this market, which is unsurprising. But on the other hand, they show the presence of both short-term and long-term price reversal ever since the financial crisis in 2008.
The authors of this study criticize most research before them since it has been done in ways capturing only linear cross-sectional patterns, ignoring the nonlinear part. That’s why this research studies the market anomalies using functional data analysis (FDA), which should be able to capture both linear and nonlinear spectrum non-parametrically. Implementing this technique, the authors find that short-term and long-term reversal effects are present in the whole sample. Moreover, they note that the one-month cooling-off period, commonly implemented when constructing strategies on reversal factors, is China’s primary source of the strategy’s profitability. This means that building an equally weighted long-short strategy, including short-term reversal (3-1 months) and long-term reversal (36-13) on the Chinese stock exchange, should be profitable.

Fundamental reason
As often mentioned, the Chinese stock market behaves differently than most other markets. The authors explain that they found evidence for the momentum effect before the financial crisis in 2008 but not after. Presumably, the momentum effect has turned into the reversal we observe today.
The strategy`s functionality seems to be also backed by the FDA, thanks to which the effect has been found. The FDA allows capturing linear and nonlinear cross-sectional patterns and dynamic time-series evolvement. This procedure enables decomposing the returns into empirical functional components. This way, it’s possible to capture the anomaly’s returns in a novel way.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all China Stock Market stocks. The composite reversal strategy will be equally-weighted between two sub-strategies: half short-term and half long-term reversals. Formation periods are 3-1 and 36-13 months. It means not including the cooling-off period in the short-term reversal part. Calculate the lagged momentum for a given stock for the aforementioned periods. Sort the portfolio into deciles according to the averaged value of the momentum for the formation periods. Long the lowest decile, short the highest. The strategy is rebalanced monthly, and each reversal strategy is value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - When the global financial crisis erupted and the bull market collapsed, the decline of stocks with high past returns was much more significant than that of those with low past returns. Thus, the momentum effects turned into reversal effects at this time point. This may explain why most of the research using data before 2008 finds evidence for momentum effects in China, while subsequent research does not.