Many firms have predictably greater earnings at certain points in the year, usually due to the underlying cyclical nature of the firm’s business. Abnormal returns are evident in months forecasted to have earnings announcements, dividends, stock splits, etc. High earnings announcement returns can be forecasted using past information about which quarter contains higher earnings than usually. This is known as a seasonality quarter. To be able to measure the seasonality of firms, the strategy uses earn-rank. A high value of earn-rank means that, historically, the current quarter of the year has larger earnings than other quarters.
In comparison, a low value of earn-rank means that the current quarter typically has lower earnings relative to other quarters. A firm whose earnings are randomly distributed tends to be in the middle of the distribution of earn-rank. Companies earn higher returns in months when they announce earnings from a positive seasonality quarter. If earnings are higher than average in one month, then they will be lower than average in other months of the year, so firms tend to cycle through both the long and short sides of the portfolio. Most of the abnormal returns occur in the short event window that surrounds the announcement. The largest effect occurs on the announcement date itself, and the second-largest occurs on the day after the announcement (which consistent with investors and analysts being positively surprised by the earnings news). This pattern could be easily developed into a highly profitable trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
The recency effect is when investors think about recent information more than old information. Investors are then more likely to overweight recent lower earnings compared to the higher earnings from the same quarter in the prior year. This would cause them to be overly pessimistic about the upcoming announcement and would lead to greater positive surprises. Investors who suffer from a recency effect will not completely ignore information from more than three quarters prior. Still, recent earnings will be overweighted if more recent events are more salient.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks of firms listed on the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ exchanges. The stocks with a price less than $5 or a missing market capitalization at the end of the previous month or missing values of earnings for any of 20 previous quarters are excluded. To construct the measure of predicted seasonality in quarter t, the earn-rank, the strategy uses five years of earnings data from quarter t−23 to t−4. First of all, compute firm earnings per share adjusted for stock splits. Then rank the 20 quarters of earnings data from largest to smallest. The earn-rank for quarter t is the average rank of quarters t−4, t−8, t−12, t−16, and t−20. This is the average rank of the same fiscal quarter as the upcoming announcement from previous years. The investor goes long with the 5% of firms with the highest earn-rank and short with the 5% of the firms with the lowest earn-rank. The condition of seasonality is fulfilled when each firm is in each portfolio only once per year. The portfolio is forming only when each leg, long and short, consists of at least ten firms. The investor opens positions on day t-1 and holds until day t+1; day t is the announcement day. The portfolio is equally weighted and rebalanced daily.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.