The essential purpose of the research (Sadik, revised 2023) was to investigate whether there are ex-ante market fundamentals that can potentially inform investors of the direction of volatility over the short term. The signal the author proposes is the average of the slopes calculated from Cash VIX term structure and VIX Futures contracts. The systematic process expects to stay in a short volatility position in most periods while tactically cutting risk or moving to long volatility assets in periods of turbulence to avoid potential abrupt losses alongside the trend-following buffer. We finally selected the simple VRP + CTA strategy that outperformed the standalone VRP and CTA, generating higher compound returns throughout the period. Furthermore, the author proposes a meta-model for the primary volatility strategy to augment the primary model and improve its overall hit rate, estimating a regression model to quantify the probability of strategy failure or, in other words, the probability of a successful bet.

Fundamental reason
The primary model is based on a (selected) short volatility product. During regular periods, the term structure of expected volatility tends to be upward-sloping or stays in contango. This is due to the expectation of higher volatility in the future, which increases the uncertainty around hedging costs (lower expected spread between future realized volatility and implied volatility at trade initiation). This presents evidence of a positive volatility risk premium. Before heightened market volatility, which is caused mainly by the above-mentioned reasons, the term structures of implied volatility and its expectation show signs of flattening relative to regular periods. Thus, ex-post, we move into a regime where the short-term expected volatility is higher than the long-term volatility (backwardation). The corresponding sell-offs cause the volatility insurance claim to be realized by long-volatility investors. The distribution of volatility carry strategies is convergent, also known as negative skew. On the other hand, (commodity and bond) trend-following strategies essentially bear an extended gamma profile with divergent distribution and, thus, are expected to provide cushion during periods of false positives generated by the tactical volatility signal.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the following ETFs (possible to replicate with futures contracts):
SVIX or SVOL, and VIXY (UX1 as futures proxy for both) for VRP, and
UGL (GC1), USO (CL1), USL (CL12), UNG (NG1), SOYB (S 1), JJC (HG1), TMF (US1), TYD (TY1) for CTA.
(Use a history data provider or your choice.)

(Parts) 1. VRP and 2. CTA are the individual volatility and trend-following strategies. VRP + CTA is the combo strategy where the unused capital is allocated to CTA.

1. The primary model is based on the measure defined as the average slope between cash VIX and futures VIXF. The slope is estimated for each available maturity at each point in time through a simple cross-sectional regression (eq. (1, 2)). Also, compute a z-score for my slope measure, which is used in:
1. 1. Conditionally on the primary model signal, which takes advantage of the mean reversion nature of volatility, tactically rotate (rebalanced at the end of each day) between a short volatility ETF or a long volatility ETF, each scaled to 20% volatility based on “decision tree” eq. (4):
a) a positive slope accompanied by a positive z-score: long SVOL (short volatility) product.
b) a positive slope with a negative breakout: closing out the position in SVOL and moving to VIXY, which is the long volatility ETF.
c) The current slope is negative with a downward trend breakout greater than 1 standard deviation; this will suggest holding VIXY.
d) Upward breakout trend in the negative slope greater than -1 standard deviation: Close long VOL and move the position back to SVOL.

2. However, the losses from short/long volatility exposure during a favorable optimistic scenario can deteriorate the risk-adjusted return of the strategy. Thus, instead of keeping unallocated capital in cash, allocate it to a 15% volatility trend following strategy (internal program rebalanced daily) based on selected commodity and bond ETFs. The reason behind selecting only commodities and bonds as asset classes is to minimize the correlation against my volatility strategy, which also has an equity bias.
2. 1. calculate a. Risk Adjusted Momentum signal (eq. (7)), b. EMA Crossover: (eq. (8)), and c. EMA Breakout (eq. (10)) signals, and normalize each by their 252-day exponential weighted volatility (eq. (11)), and finally transform them into a position size based on a sigmoid function capped at 2 sigma (eq. (12)).
2. 2. The gross weights for each commodity are 10% and 20% for the fixed-income assets. This ensures a notional allocation of 60% in commodities and 40% in fixed income.

Now, allocation between the CTA and VRP is quite simple. For example, if 40% of notional weight is allocated to SVOL, allocate 60% of the remaining capital to the CTA Program under that case.

Each strategy is rebalanced daily, with results computed without transaction costs. The exact position sizing (volatility sizing) is explained above.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Strategy variants preserve the characteristics of short volatility strategies while simultaneously providing crisis alpha generated through CTA and long volatility positions.