Value investing has a long history dating back to Graham and Dodd (1934), and since then has attracted a lot of attention from academics and investment practitioners alike. However, the long-short value investment strategies have recently faced great challenges due to their poor performance over the past two decades in the US. For instance, the HML factor of Fama and French (1993) has an average return of -0.09% per month from 2001 to 2020. In the light of the diminishing value profits in the US, Feng et al. (2022) examine the effectiveness of value investment strategies in China’s A-shares market, the second largest and second most liquid stock market worldwide. Their study finds that, unlike in the US, long-short value strategies are profitable in China, but they are practically very hard to execute due to various short-sale constraints. However, since the long-only value strategies work in both markets and exhibit almost zero correlation, the authors propose a trading strategy that buys value and/or profitable firms in both China and US simultaneously. An international investor with a portfolio that has a 50% weight on US firms with low valuation and/or high profitability and the other 50% on similar Chinese firms is expected to achieve a return of 13.22% per annum and a Sharpe ratio of 0.83. This long-only international investment approach is profitable and beneficial since it avoids the costs and risks of short sales and provides a partial hedge of market risk due to the low return correlations between the two country portfolios.

Fundamental reason
The main principle of value investing is to maximize the difference between the stock’s intrinsic value and the price paid to purchase it. One approach is to identify undervalued stocks using the valuation indicators, such as the book-to-market equity and earnings-to-price ratios. The strategy assumes that the undervalued stocks are just temporarily mispriced and will eventually converge towards their intrinsic values. The other approach is to pursue high-quality companies. Novy-Marx (2013) showed that firms with higher profitability generate significantly higher returns than less profitable firms. According to the q-theory with investment frictions, an expected stock return equals the expected marginal benefit of an investment divided by the current marginal cost of investment. Hence, the q-theory predicts that profitable firms should generate higher expected returns than unprofitable ones after holding the investment rate fixed since profitable firms have a higher marginal benefit of the investment. The proposed international value investment strategy combines both valuation- and profitability-oriented approaches but with an added flavor of geographical diversification. Such a combination of both approaches converges to one of the famous mottos of the legendary Warren Buffett: “Buy a great company at a fair price.”

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of A-share stocks traded on the Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges (China) and stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ (US). Start the analysis by constructing the value-profit composite factor in China in the following steps. First, from the universe of Chinese stocks, eliminate the smallest 30% of stocks based on their firm size at the end of the previous month. Second, construct three valuation measures, namely, gross-profit-to-market-equity, operating-profit-to-market-equity, and net-profit-to-market-equity ratios. Gross profit equals total revenue minus the cost of goods sold. Operating profit equals total revenue minus total operating expenses. Finally, net profit is calculated as total revenue minus total expenses plus gains minus losses. For all these valuation measures, market equity is the product of the month-end closing price and total outstanding shares owned by public investors (i.e., the free float). Third, construct three profitability measures, namely, gross-profit-to-total-assets, operating-profit-to-book-equity, and net-profit-to-book-equity. Book equity is defined as total shareholder equity minus the book value of preferred stocks. A detailed description of all variables used in the study can be found in Appendix Table A1. The firm-level financial information used in the valuation and profitability measures is collected from the most recent annual or semi-annual reports. Fourth, rank all eligible Chinese stocks based on each of the aforementioned valuation and profitability measures. Assign the high (low) rank to the value or profitable (growth or unprofitable) stocks. At the end of each month, sort the universe of Chinese stocks into two portfolios based on the firm size. Within the two size portfolios, further, break the stocks into three value-weighted portfolios based on the average ranking of each stock across all six valuation and profitability measures as follows: top 30%, medium 40%, and bottom 30%. The value-profit composite factor longs the top portfolios of each size portfolio, i.e., value and/or profitable Chinese stocks. The factor portfolios are value-weighted and rebalanced monthly. Subsequently, from the universe of US stocks, construct long-only versions of value (HML) and profitability (RMW) factors of Fama and French (2015). The long-only value (profitability) factor sorts stocks into two portfolios based on their firm size and then, within each size portfolio, buys the top 30% of stocks with the highest book-to-market ratio (operating profitability). The trading rule for the international long-only value investment strategy is as follows: allocate 50% to the value-profit composite factor (China), 25% to the long leg of the HML factor (US), and 25% to the long leg of the RMW factor (US).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - it’s long only strategy.