Although, some branch of literature connects large profits with large risk and also a common sense suggests that the higher profits should be compensation for the higher risk, the reality is different. Academic research has found out that holding low-volatility stocks in the long run, provides superior risk-adjusted returns compared to holding high-volatility stocks. Naturally, this can be expected, because the portfolio with a lower return that is not connected with various drawdowns would have better performance in the long run, compared to a portfolio with steep ascents and large drawdowns. The novel idea of this academic paper is to time the volatility and corresponding returns. Authors agree that low-volatility stocks outperform high-volatility stocks in the long run, what is in line with past research that has been made; however, there seems to be a possibility to time the volatility factor. During bear markets, it is clear that it is best to hold low-volatility stocks; however, during bull markets, volatile growth stocks are most profitable. Volatility timing strategy could be employed by keeping track of the shape of the volatility decile portfolio’s return proﬁle, where the slope is defined as the difference of the return of the high-volatility and low-volatility portfolio. If the market condition is good, the slope is expected to be positive and vice versa, if the market condition is bad, the slope is expected to be negative. Such findings led authors to time volatility according to the market condition (to switch between high and low volatility stocks), but they have found an even better approach. Medium volatility stocks, in general, have the largest Sharpe ratio (the ideal mix of return and risk). Therefore it seems to be the best to hold medium volatility stocks and switching to either low or high volatility stocks according to the market state (this could be done by testing a statistical hypothesis about the slope of the volatility portfolios).

Fundamental reason
High-volatility portfolio is connected with very poor returns over time. On the other hand, the success of holding a low-volatility portfolio over time can be clearly attributed to the simple compounding eﬀect, where a smaller return with lower volatility is in the long-term accompanied with attractive risk-adjusted-performance. Additionally, return proﬁle of volatility deciles is time-varying. No surprise, all portfolios have better return performance under good market conditions, compared to portfolios during the bad market conditions. The first reason for the functionality of timing is because, during the good market condition, the high volatility portfolio has the highest return. Secondly, during bad market conditions, naturally, the low volatility portfolio becomes the best performer, with the smallest loss. Where the market condition could be easily extracted from the slope of the volatility decile portfolio return proﬁle, that will change sign depending on the prevailing market condition. When the slope is negative, the shape of returns for decile volatility portfolios is downward sloping, which indicates a negative relationship between return and volatility. As a result, holding a low-volatility portfolio is optimal. And vice versa, when the market is experiencing strong growth during the boom time, the return slope is positive, a clear indication of a positive relationship between return and volatility. Lastly, the mid-volatility decile portfolio compensates for the slightly higher volatility by exhibiting noticeably higher return. Therefore, if the market conditions are not significantly “good” or “bad”, it is best to hold mid-volatility stocks (base portfolio in the volatility timing strategy).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of CRSP common stocks. Firstly, pick 1000 stocks with the largest market capitalization. Secondly, calculate the realized volatility of each stock over the past month and group them into decile portfolios based on their volatility. As a next step, the slope is computed, where the slope is defined as the difference of the return of the high-volatility and low-volatility portfolio. The default portfolio to hold is the mid-volatility portfolio. If the slope becomes statistically significantly positive for a given month, the market condition is good, and switch to the highest volatility decile. If the slope becomes statistically significantly negative for a given month – the market condition is bad and switch to the lowest volatility decile. Hypotheses are tested using t-tests (the Student’s t-distribution) with a moving window sample size of 12 months and a signiﬁcance level of 0.1%. The strategy is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only therefore it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as the most of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).