
Among various financial market information available, the up and down movements of market index levels and stock prices, relative to the previous day, when investors start trading on the markets are probably the most simple and most important information for the investors. Observations from the Chinese stock market show that a market-wide up/down trend early of a trading day can predict the subsequent intraday return to the end of the trading day.

Moreover, the research has proved that these up and down trends are predictable by two indicators, namely the Index Signal (IS), defined as the index return at the time relative to the closing index level of the previous trading day. IS captures the overall up and down market movement at any point of the trading day from the previous day.

The second indicator is the UpDown Signal, defined as the proportional difference in the total numbers of up stocks to down stocks at any point of the trading day compared to their closing prices of the previous day. UpDown Signal measures the overall stock movement (with a respect to the percentage of stocks moving up to moving down) at any point of the trading day.

Novel research, which has used the 16-years Chinese and 3-years U.S. stock market data for each minute of the trading day, has investigated if these intraday signal indicators can predict the subsequent intraday market returns. It has been found that, in the most minutes of trading days, both indicators significantly explain the subsequent intraday return from the minute to the end of the trading day. Of course, the aforementioned can be utilized in the daily trading strategy, which longs or shorts the index according to the signal. In spite of the fact that the strategy was primarily on the Chinese stocks with a great performance, we would centre our attention around the US stocks, because the US market is more popular and bigger and the pattern is the same.

Fundamental reason
There was found no evidence that the strategy return is generated by taking a systemic risk and beta strategy, and therefore the systemic risk is not the source of the intraday strategy returns. However, the strategy returns can be explained by the activity of the individual investors and the intraday sentiment. Results indicate that the intraday strategy returns are most likely driven by the intraday sentimental behaviours of the retail investors. Naive individual investors are more likely affected by the most recent performance of the market index and the overall up and down movement of the stock prices. Due to this short-term sentiment, investors are more likely to move the market in the same direction over the rest of the considered trading day. Intuitively, the two intraday signals or predictors could be interpreted as two market intraday sentiment sources. To sum it up, most of the time, both predictors have a significantly positive impact on the intraday market returns. Although, the US stock market is already well-developed and is not quite comparable to the emerging Chinese stock market, even with less trading limitation, easier for arbitrage, and more rational investors, the existence of individual investors still leads to a significant intraday sentiment pattern in the US stock market. Research’s results of the cross-section analysis of the retail investor activities are consistent with those of the Chinese markets. This implies that the intraday sentiment signals can predict the subsequent intraday returns not only for emerging markets but also for the mature markets.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks with share codes 10 or 11 in CRSP and listed in NYSE, AMEX or NASDAQ. While considering the aforementioned stocks, compute the intraday Up/Down signal of stocks (UDS) – the numbers of stocks moving upwards and downwards. UDS at day t and at time m (let the m be equal to the 9:45 am) is equal to the number of stocks moving up minus the number of stocks moving down (since the close at the last day) this difference is divided by the total number of the stocks.

Buy the market portfolio and hold to the market closing, if the UDS is positive at time 9:45 am and sell the market portfolio, and hold to the market closing if the UDS is negative (a market portfolio could be an S&P 500 index bought via future, ETF or CFD for example). The strategy is rebalanced daily.

Strategy has been developed originally for Chinese market, but can be adapted also for the US market.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy is timing equity market, but traders can possibly split this strategy into two halves and use a short-only part of this strategy. After a careful backtest, this short-only strategy might be used as a hedge/diversification during market/economic crises.