The times when climate change was only a topic for activists are long gone. Nowadays, the issue is becoming a major concern among financial regulators or academics. Still, the investors seem to be lacking behind, as is shown in this novel research paper, which studies the exposure of stocks to climate change.
The authors utilize the Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI), which is a publicly available and well-known metric used in climate debates and research. The reason is that the index includes temperature, precipitation and also evapotranspiration. As a result, its variation is not caused only by the short-term weather fluctuations, which as we know can be significant, but it should reflect the long-term climate changes.
Using a simple linear regression model, it is possible to estimate climate change exposure (proxied by the PDSI). At first, the research shows that climate change exposure significantly forecasts a firm’s future profitability. The increase in exposure to climate change decreases the ROA of the firm. Furthermore, this result is connected with investors’ limited attention and, as a result, stocks incorporate the climate exposure information only with a lag. Hence, the exposure can be a base of a profitable strategy that goes long stocks with the lowest exposure and short stocks with the highest exposure.

Fundamental reason
The fundamental reason for the functionality is the investors’ inability to timely and efficiently include the climate change exposure information. Cross-sectionally, the increase in climate change exposure both economically and statistically significant reduce firms ROA in the future. However, investors pay only limited attention to these data. Therefore, the price adjustment is lagged, from which stems the return predictability.
Secondly, the primary variable used in the research – the Palmer Drought Severity Index is publicly available, which ensures that the strategy can be utilized in practice. Furthermore, the strategy is robust to various controls such as firm or industry characteristics, employing a different climate change variable, or excluding small caps. Last but not least, the strategy remains highly significant in the presence of well-known asset-pricing models such as CAPM, Fama-French three-factor model or Carhart’s four-factor model.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed on NYSE, NASDAQ and AMEX. Each month, firms with a market capitalization in the bottom 20% percentile are dropped to omit small caps. The Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) is obtained from the National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) of the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
Firstly, estimate time-series regressions for each stock. The dependent variable is the monthly return for stock minus the risk-free rate, and the explanatory variables include constant and PDSI. Regressions are estimated using the past 60 months of data. The final measure of the climate change exposure is the absolute value of the PDSI coefficient (beta). Each month, sort stocks into quintiles based on their climate change exposures. Long the lowest quintile and short the highest quintile. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - According to the results in Table 11, the return of the long-short portfolio remains significant independent of various systematic risks, including NBER recessions.