The short-term reversal is a phenomenon that occurs when the stocks that performed worst (best) in the previous month or week outperform (underperform) in the current month or week. Although this anomaly is well-researched, none of the prior studies examined how the macroeconomic conditions affect the short-term reversal. A novel paper by Chui (2021) fills this gap and studies returns of the short-term reversal strategy in various uncertainty periods. To do so, the author employs the Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) index of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2006) as EPU is known to influence investors’ behavior and is unlikely to be affected by investors. The study documents that short-term reversals are more (less) substantial in the current month when EPU is greater (smaller) in the prior month. Specifically, the “loser” quintile (worst-performing stocks in the previous month) outperformed the “winner” quintile (best-performing stocks in the previous month) by 1.34% per month in high uncertainty periods. The return spread turns negative and insignificant in low uncertainty periods. Put differently, according to the research, a one standard deviation increase in the EPU index leads to a 0.6% increase in monthly returns on short-term reversal strategy when a Fama-French five factors are evaluated at their means. The author explains these findings with the investors’ overconfidence and the liquidity effect.

Fundamental reason
Literature offers two possible explanations for the existence of the short-term reversal anomaly. Behavioral explanation postulates that investors overreact to information because of cognitive bias, such as overconfidence (Cooper, 1999). Overconfidence makes investors overestimate the quality of the information they receive. As a result, when positive (negative) news arrives, investors bid the stock prices up (down) above (below) the fundamental value. These pricing errors are corrected shortly in the future that generates short-term reversal. Besides, Kumar (2009) finds evidence showing that investors exhibit stronger cognitive biases in higher market uncertainty. Hence, the EPU boosts investors’ overconfidence, so they overreact more to news, leading to more significant pricing errors that, in turn, results in a substantial short-term reversal effect.
On the other hand, the liquidity explanation is based on the idea that holding the inventory of a stock is risky. Since holding inventory of a stock is risky, liquidity providers demand compensation for providing liquidity (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1995). When liquidity providers possess a positive (negative) excess inventory of stock, they quote prices below (above) the fundamental value, which discourages sell (buy) orders and induces the buy (sell) orders. After stock prices reverse back to the fundamental values, imbalances in the order flow disappear. Besides, the high EPU is associated with a low supply of liquidity, wide bid-ask spreads that make trading more costly and cause more substantial reversals.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all common stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ exchanges. At the beginning of each month t, sort stocks into quintiles based on their returns in month t-1 from the loser (20% worst-performing stocks) to winner (20% best-performing stocks). Buy the “loser” quintile and sell the “winner” quintile in month t when the economic policy uncertainty index of Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2006) for the US, available at policyuncertainty.com in month t-1 is higher than the median of this index since 1985. Weigh the portfolio equally and rebalance monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The idea behind classical reversal should also hold in this strategy: Equity reversal strategy is usually a type of “liquidity providing” strategy, and as such, they typically perform well during market crises. However, reversal strategy is also naturally a type of “short volatility” strategy; their returns increase mainly in the weeks following large stock market declines. Traders must be cautious during crises during days with high volatility as reversal strategies usually force traders to buy stocks which performed especially bad (and to sell short stocks with an extremely positive short term performance). This position is emotionally hard to open, and risk management of reversal strategies must also be very strict during these days. We recommend reading a research paper by Nagel: “Evaporating Liquidity” to gain insight into the behavior of reversal strategies during crises.
It even might be magnified since the high EPU is associated with a low supply of liquidity, wide bid-ask spreads that make trading more costly and cause more substantial reversals.