Both momentum and accruals effects are well-known terms in the financial literature. Momentum as an anomaly was first documented a long time ago by Jegadeesh and Titman. The idea is pretty simple, trading strategies of buying past winners and shorting past losers generate significant profits. Additionally, both accruals and cash flows (however we would only deal with the accruals, the theory about cash flows can be found in the paper) exhibit significant explanatory power for future returns, even after controlling for the past returns, suggesting that earnings components and past returns each contain valuable information for forecasting returns. Research suggests that there are some practical implications of corporate fundamentals on financial market trading. The evidence shows that the total accruals contain exclusive and unpriced information. The aforementioned can bring incremental value on the pure technical trading strategies like momentum. Therefore novel research proposes an enhanced momentum strategy based on the combined signal from past returns and accruals. Results of the paper show that the potential investor can achieve significant returns from conditioning a momentum trading strategy on the effect of the accrual by going long low accruals stocks with good past performance and shorting high accruals past losers. Moreover, the enhanced momentum strategies also exhibit much smaller drawdowns and almost double the Sharpe ratio of the traditional, simple momentum strategy.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, both momentum and accruals anomalies are already a well-researched and generally accepted in practical as well as in the academic world. Therefore their combination in enhanced momentum strategy composed from both anomalies is natural and should work. The results are consistent with the earnings fixation explanation of the accrual anomaly. The aforementioned suggests that investors may fail to appreciate the lower persistence of accruals. The negligence of the persistence attribute between accruals and cash flows could lead to stock mispricing and thereby exacerbate momentum payoffs. Hence the evidence from the paper support the common interpretation of momentum anomaly as a failure of rational expectations to process all available information accurately.
Moreover, the authors have confirmed that their enhanced momentum strategy performs better than the simple momentum strategy across different market states as well as levels of investor sentiment. Additionally, accruals-momentum strategies outperform the traditional momentum strategy in all subperiods in the paper. The improved performance also is not sensitive to January effects, time variations and more importantly, transaction costs. Last but not least, findings also suggest that the incremental effects of the earnings components such as accruals cannot be fully captured by the existing and frequently used asset pricing models and common risk factors.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all common stocks on the NYSE/AMEX; however, all stocks with a price of less than $5 are excluded. Firstly, all stocks are divided into low and high bid-ask spread portfolios. Nextly, double sort stocks from the low bid-ask spread portfolio based on their past returns and the earnings component – accruals. Stocks are assigned to one of five portfolios based on their past 6-month returns (momentum sorting) and one of five portfolios based on their accruals. Take a long position in the momentum winner portfolio with lowest accruals and a short position in the momentum loser portfolio with the highest accruals. All portfolios are held for six months (month 2 to 7), keeping a one-month gap between the formation and the holding periods (month 1) – this results in overlapping portfolios. The portfolio is equally weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of accruals trading strategy to the equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. Strategy using accruals is usually built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.