In recent years, “smart beta” investing has gained popularity among investors due to its potential to generate alpha and increase portfolio returns. The goal is to perform better than the benchmark index by selecting stocks based on various asset pricing anomaly factors. However, the growth of smart-beta investing and its popularity leads to “alpha decay” – the reduction of excess returns, or alpha, generated by investment strategies as more investors exploit them.

Many studies have examined the portfolio choices of investors. For example, according to Koijen and Yogo (2019), investors have heterogeneous demand for stock characteristics related to anomaly factors. On the other hand, according to Haddad et al. (2021), investor composition could differ significantly and persistently across stocks due to market segmentation. Certain stocks may have a higher number of smart-beta investors than others, which raises the question of whether competition among investors causes lower returns among stocks with higher smart-beta ownership.
The author focused on seven well-researched cross-sectional stock return anomalies: Profitability, Investment, Momentum, Earnings Quality, External Financing, Earnings Surprise, and Financial Distress. Firstly, for each stock and anomaly, he calculated a cross-sectional rank score (a higher score means a higher expected return of the stock based on the anomaly) and a composite score as the average rank score across 7 anomalies. Secondly, the author estimated each investor’s smart beta demand for the anomalies and smart-beta institutional ownership (SBIO). Finally, examining the relationship between SBIO and the expected returns of anomaly factors, the author found that the return predictability of anomaly factors decreased in smart-beta institutional ownership and documented a significant negative relationship between anomaly factor returns and smart-beta institutional ownership.

Naturally, such a result can be the basis of the trading strategy, telling us to first sort stocks into terciles based on their composite SBIO, choose the lowest tercile, and sort stocks into quintiles within this group based on their composite score. Then, finally, create an equal-weighted quintile long-short portfolio.

Fundamental reason
The author documented a significant negative relationship between anomaly factor returns and smart-beta institutional ownership (investors who trade according to the anomalies). The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the factor-oriented demand of smart-beta investors, which contributes to mispricing for the anomaly factors. Moreover, it lowers the price-of-risk of factors (compensation that investors require in exchange for greater risk while investing in a given factor). On the other hand, as already mentioned in the Short description, stocks have different smart-beta demands due to investor heterogeneity and market segmentation. This leads to a decrease in anomaly factors’ predictability in smart-beta institutional ownership (13.5% decrease per 1 standard deviation increase in smart-beta institutional ownership).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all AMEX, NYSE, and NASDAQ stocks with share codes 10 and 11. Stocks with negative book equity and stocks below the 10th NYSE market capitalization percentile are excluded. The data come from Compustat, CRSP, Open Source Asset Pricing, and Thomson Reuters.

The 7 anomalies are Profitability, Investment, Momentum, Earnings Quality, External Financing, Distress, and Earnings Surprise. The authors selected 2-3 representative characteristics for each anomaly (Appendix A on page 55).

Firstly, for each anomaly k, in quarter t, for stock n, calculate a cross-sectional rank score s_{k,n,t} in two steps: At first, transform characteristics into a cross-sectional rank score (0-1), where the higher rank represents a higher expected return. Next, average the score for each anomaly, and transform this into a cross-sectional rank score again. Subsequently, for each stock n, calculate also Composite_Score_{t} as the average rank score across 7 anomalies.

The model (equation 11, page 19) defines the portfolio weight in asset n as a logit function of stock characteristics (log market capitalization, log book equity, CAPM beta, and the cross-sectional rank scores of 7 anomaly factors). Using the logistic regression model, estimate the coefficient γ_{i,k,t} of each investor i, for each anomaly k, in time t. This coefficient represents investors’ demand for the anomaly characteristic in time t.

Next, compute each investor’s total demand δ_{i,k,t} for each anomaly k, in time t, following equation 13 on page 21, utilizing coefficient γ_{i,k,t}, and the sample covariances and variances of the ranking scores for individual stocks.

Then, for each factor, determine Factor_Demand_{i,k,t}, calculating 20-quarter rolling averages of δ_{i,k,t} and winsorizing this measure at 2.5% and 97.5% level across investors for each t and k.

Subsequently, calculate Composite_Demand_{i,t} by averaging investors’ demand across seven anomaly factors (equation 14, page 22).

In the next step, for each stock n, in each quarter t, calculate the Composite Smart-Beta Institutional Ownership (Composite_SBIO_{t}) as the average of composite demands of investors, weighting each investor by the number of shares held (equation 16, page 24).

Finally, sort stocks into terciles based on Composite_SBIO. Choose the tercile with the lowest Composite_SBIO, and within this group, sort stocks into quintiles based on the Composite_Score. Create an equal-weighted quintile long-short portfolio.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - No mention of performance in stress times.