Accruals are adjustments made by accountants to operating cash ﬂows to better measure the current period ﬁrm´s performance. Interestingly, past research has documented a robust negative relation between accruals and the cross-section of expected returns. Nowadays, this relation is well-known as the accrual anomaly and can also be found in our screener. Another well-known measure and asset pricing factor is the profitability of a firm (a well-known factor of Fama-French five-factor model). Novel research has in its way connected those two anomalies and what is the most important from the practical point of view, with a superior performance that outperforms both anomalies. The resulting connected measure is a cash-based operating proﬁtability, a proﬁtability that is devoided of accounting accruals adjustments.
This measure better explains the cross-section of expected returns than gross proﬁtability, operating proﬁtability and net income, all of which include accruals. Moreover, the cash-based operating proﬁtability performs so well in explaining the cross-section of expected returns that it subsumes the accrual anomaly. In fact, potential investors would do better if they just include the cash-based operating proﬁtability to their investment opportunity set instead of adding both accruals and proﬁtability strategies. To sum it up, trading strategy consisting of going long stocks with high cash-based profitability measure and shorting stocks with low cash-based profitability is both economically and statistically significant with an added value of outperforming both accruals and operating proﬁtability factors. Moreover, the strategy minimizes the trading costs since the predictive power is so persistent (according to the research 10years ahead) that the strategy requires only a yearly rebalancing.

Fundamental reason
Unlike both accruals and operating proﬁtability, cash-based operating proﬁtability contains information about payment shocks and growth as an added value to just the proﬁtability. More importantly, cash-based operating proﬁtability, a measure of proﬁtability that is devoid of accounting accruals adjustments, as a result, better explains the cross-section of expected returns than other known measures such as gross proﬁtability, operating proﬁtability or net income, all of which include accruals. The evidence implies that only the cash-based component of operating proﬁts matters in the cross-section of expected returns and the predictive power of accruals is attributable to the well-known fact – their negative correlation with the cash-based component. Therefore, creating a cash-based operating proﬁtability measure by purging accruals from operating proﬁtability leads to a signiﬁcantly stronger predictor of future stock performance that eﬀectively subsumes the accrual anomaly. One of the explanations of the accrual anomaly implies that accruals would predict future surprises even when one controls for cash-based operating proﬁtability. However, the authors of this research have observed otherwise—accruals have no explanatory power if they control for cash-based operating proﬁtability.
Moreover, the cash-based operating proﬁtability predicts returns as far as ten years into the future. This could indicate another possible explanation – an initial market under-reaction to cash ﬂow information that is gradually corrected over a decade. However, this result could indicate that cash-based proﬁtability and expected returns share common economic determinants (for example, risk) that are relatively constant over time period.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all ﬁrms traded on NYSE, Amex and NASDAQ. Excluded are securities other than ordinary common shares. Firstly, divide the stocks to small and big stocks, partitioned at the median NYSE market capitalization breakpoint and from now on consider only big stocks. Secondly, the investor has to calculate operating proﬁtability as sales minus cost of goods sold minus sales, general and administrative expenses. This measure captures the performance of the ﬁrm’s operations and is not aﬀected by non-operating items, such as leverage and taxes. Nextly, to calculate the cash-based operating proﬁtability measure, remove the accrual components included in the computation of operating proﬁtability. Lastly, sort the stocks to the deciles according to their cash-based operating proﬁtability measure. Long the top decile and short the bottom decile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced on a yearly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.