An insider is an individual working for a firm, who has access to non-public information. These people are usually officers or directors who, among other things, know news about the firm before they are disclosed to the public. That gives them a certain advantage on the market. Because of the advantage, some regulations apply to them trading their firm’s stocks. They are obliged to report how they trade the stocks, and this information is publicly available.
Most of the current studies focus on the stocks insiders actively buy or sell, but because of different motivations behind these acts, this can tell little to nothing about the stock’s future price. The authors of this study propose to look at it from a different angle. Selling a stock from the insider’s portfolio doesn’t tell only something about the sold stocks, it gives out also important information about the not-sold stocks. Meaning that even when the insider is selling an undervalued stock for a liquidity-motivated reason, they still believe the stocks they are keeping are even more undervalued, thus have the potential to perform better. It is important to note here that the insiders, who hold positions in more than one company are considered, as they need to have access to insider information in more than one company, and also they are legally required to only publicly disclose the information about their trades in these companies where they hold a position. We get a significant long-only strategy by estimating which stocks they have in their portfolio and buying the stocks they decide not to sell.

Fundamental reason
As mentioned, insiders have more knowledge about their stocks, which leads to them making better-informed choices. A decision to sell one of their stocks is also an active decision not to sell the other stocks. That means the not-sold stocks are more worth keeping than the sold stock, thus are still undervalued and would make a good investment for the proposed trading strategy.
Additionally, this effect is not a short-term market timing, but is largely persistent and has a low turnover ratio (and thus also transaction costs). The effect is significant for monthly, quarterly, semi-annual and annual rebalancing period as well. Furthermore, the performance is significant even in the presence of common asset pricing factors such as size, book-to-market and momentum, suggesting that the effect is unique and novel.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, NYSE Arca (exchange code 1,2,3 and 4), AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks with share codes 10 or 11. Stocks with share prices less than 5 dollars, options, and derivatives are excluded.
First, data is collected in the following way. The strategy is based on insiders’ trading activity, where an individual is considered an insider when he holds a position (an officer or a director) in at least two different companies. An insider’s portfolio is estimated based on their SEC Form 3 and Form 4 fillings. Form 3 is filled out once when the individual becomes that company’s insider, admitting his current number of shares. Form 3 serves as a “starting point” for the estimate because once the individual is an insider, they have to report their trading activity by Form 4 within 2 business days. Both are publicly available.
When the estimates for the insiders’ portfolios are created, the rest of the trading strategy is simple. First, each month a portfolio is created by buying the insiders’ “not-sold” stocks in that month. Those are the stocks that were estimated to be in their portfolio, which have not been sold in the given month. In case one insider sells the stock and another doesn’t, this stock is not included. Then hold the portfolio and after 12 months rebalance. That leads to a strategy with 12 different portfolios for each month, out of which each one has a yearly rebalancing period. Portfolios are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It is a long-only equity strategy.