In recent years, the finance literature has widely studied the anomalies connected with lottery stocks. In this paper, a new light is shed on the cross-sectional variation in lottery premium induced by investors gambling preference by further investigation on whether a stocks past performance has a significant impact on its lottery premium.
As individual investors and traders are as well just ordinary people, they also have a behavioural bias to attach high importance to very positive news. Consequently, they choose stocks with high positive past price jumps, which are, therefore, stocks liable to overvaluation. Hence, it isn’t the best idea to buy these lottery stocks as it’s shown in the paper that past stock performance negatively predicts a one-month-ahead price boost probability. Specifically, the lottery premium is concentrated on stocks that performed poorly in the previous months (from t-3 to t-1). Therefore, the prices of loser stocks have a higher probability of jumping upwards than those of winner stocks. More detailed analysis reveals that lottery-like stocks with poor performance have a much higher chance of generating a huge payoff in the next month than those with excellent performance. Thus, the lottery-like features depend strongly on the stock’s past performance. In other words, the effectiveness of lottery-like measurements can be significantly improved by incorporating information on the stock’s past performance.
To sum it up, magnified lottery features of stocks among losers results in subsequent negative performance among high lottery stocks and subsequent positive performance among low lottery stocks.

Fundamental reason
Lotto investors that prefer to gamble on lottery stocks are highly affected by behaviour bias, and their strategies are built upon that. Therefore, lotto investors may prefer to buy such types of stocks because they believe stocks whose prices have suffered a severe decline have more space for their prices to jump upwards. In other words, lotto investors tend to believe that lottery-like stocks with poor performance may enjoy a vigorous rebound shortly. In contrast, those with excellent performance may have a lower probability of generating an extremely positive return given their current high prices. On the other hand, loser stocks without
lottery-like features may continue to perform poorly. As a result, lotto investors prefer to gamble on lottery stocks with a poor performance given their highest probability of winning and relatively low costs. This effect results in overpriced lottery stocks and can be utilized in a trading strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. firms with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ). Stocks with a price lower than one USD are dropped and closed-end funds and real estate investment trusts are excluded. Firstly, perform conditional bivariate portfolio sorts. Specifically, a sequential sort by creating three portfolios (30%-40%-30%) ranked on past stock performance (PFM) measured by the stock’s cumulative returns across months t-3 and t-1. The bottom 30% of stocks are denoted as losers and the top 30% stocks as winners. Then within loser portfolio, sort stocks into quintile portfolios based on an ascending sort of a lottery proxy (MAX or LTRY) calculated in month t-1. We present results for the MAX proxy that is the maximum daily return of a stock in the previous month. Among loser portfolio, long the lowest lottery decile and short the highest lottery decile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide any information about the usage of the strategy as a hedge.