Academic literature identifies various persistent patterns in the overnight and trading day components of stock returns; literature also suggests that there are two distinct groups that tend to dominate the overnight or daytime trading periods. The excess demand by these groups of investors can create a daily “tug of war”, that leads to a recurring pattern of return reversals across the two periods. For example, excess demand by the prevailing overnight investors may tend to pull prices in one direction that culminates in an opening price; however, that is at odds with the views of the opposing group. This would result in an opposing group that may pull prices back through daytime trading, culminating at the day’s close in a trading day reversal. This novel research suggests that a wise indicator of the intensity of this tug of war between overnight and day trading groups could be the persistence of daily return reversals during a month.

This paper constructs a measure of the intensity of this tug of war for a given stock, by computing the abnormal frequency of daily reversals in a month that is characterized by either low or high opening prices. Moreover, the research has proved that only high opening prices that are subsequently reversed during the day are interesting for the construction of trading strategy. Stocks with a high frequency of positive overnight returns followed by negative daytime reversals outperform stocks with a low frequency of such reversals. Therefore the strategy could be executed as going long stocks with the highest abnormal frequency of daily reversals in a month that is characterized by high opening prices and shorting stocks with the lowest abnormal frequency of daily reversals in a month that is characterized by high opening prices. Such a strategy is both economically and statistically significant, and the analysis was also made in the universe of large stocks, which ensures the liquidity of the strategy.

Fundamental reason
Positive overnight returns followed by negative daytime reversals in U.S. stocks suggest a recurring daily tug of war between opposing groups of investors that have tendencies to trade in these different intraday periods. According to the research, these daily return patterns reflect overnight price pressure by noise traders; however, this is reversed by other investors who tend to operate during the day. As a result, the unusually high monthly frequency of these negative daytime return reversals predicts higher future returns, both in the cross-section and in the overall market. As tests suggest, the return premium documented in the paper represents compensation for the noise trader risk. Moreover, the predictive relation is asymmetric, because future stock returns are only predicted by a high frequency of negative daytime reversals characterized by high opening prices and not by positive daytime reversals characterized by low opening prices.
The paper argues that the asymmetric relation supports the noise trader risk hypothesis because the prevalence of noise traders in the overnight period is more likely to result in high opening prices and negative daytime reversals. Additionally, retail investors comprise a greater portion of total trading volume, especially involving retail purchases during months with a high frequency of negative daytime reversals. Paper also states that there are two necessary conditions for an explanation based on noise trader risk. Firstly, there is documented a negative contemporaneous relation between the monthly frequency of these daily reversals and stock returns in the same month, which is consistent with investors requiring a higher discount rate to trade such stocks. And most importantly, the authors have shown that a higher frequency of positive overnight returns followed by negative daytime reversals in one month tends to persist in the future so that investors are justified in requiring this higher premium as compensation for higher risk of trading against noise traders in the future.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. Financial and utility firms are excluded.

Firstly, decompose daily stock returns into an overnight component and a daytime component. For each firm i on day d, the daytime (open-to-close) return (RETOC) is defined as the relative price change between the market open and close of the same day d, what can be easily computed as the price of the stock at close divided by the price of the stock at open minus 1. Nextly, impute the previous overnight (close-to-open) return from the daytime return and the standard daily close-to-close return (RETid), this return denoted as RETCO can be computed as 1+RETid/1+RETOCid minus 1. Negative daytime reversal is defined as a positive overnight return that is followed by a negative daytime return.

As a next step, for each month t, calculate the frequency (percentage denoted as the NRit) of trading days in which stock i has negative daytime reversals. Finally, the abnormal frequency of negative daytime reversals (AB_NR) is defined as NRit scaled by the average NRit over the past 12 months. As a final step, stocks are sorted into quintiles by AB_NR, and then, stocks are independently sorted again into terciles by their SIZE (market capitalization) one at a time. From the large stocks portfolio, long top AB_NR quintile and short the bottom AB_NR quintile. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.