There are already many studies dealing with momentum anomaly and associated investment opportunities. One of the recent additions to momentum-related literature examines the outcome of combining momentum on stocks and CDS. The rationale behind it is that both instruments are based on the same firm fundamentals, but their market prices often move differently. Comparing the momentum signals between these two instruments further allows identifying individual stocks’ momentum cycle (e.g. strong stock momentum combined with weak CDS momentum suggests that stock is reaching the peak of overreaction phase and that a reversal in price is to come). A simple strategy that buys joint stock/CDS winners and sells joint losers outperforms traditional momentum strategy by 122 basis points per month. Furthermore, accounting for reversal arising from trading “disjoint” winners/losers (where past returns of one instrument strongly disagree with returns of the other) further improves the performance, outperforming the basic momentum by 132 bps per month, with higher annual Sharpe ratio.

Fundamental reason
A possible explanation for the phenomenon is the segmentation theory by Goldstein, Li and Yang (2013). The theory identifies a diverse set of investors with different interests or objectives. Market prices are influenced by simple speculative trades, but also by more sophisticated hedging trades. The latter respond to relative pricing between stock and CDS markets – if a price disagreement between the two markets occurs, it attracts hedgers and causes a return reversal.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of firms listed at NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ, whose stock returns data are available at CRSP database and the associated CDS contracts data can be obtained from the Markit Group. The strategy combines two signals – joint momentum and disjoint contrarian. As for the former, an investor sorts stocks and CDS into quintiles based on the past 12-month returns (skipping the most recent month) and past 4-month returns, respectively. The investor purchases (sells) firms that fall in the top (bottom) quintile for both instruments. The contrarian strategy purchases (sells) firms that are in the bottom (top) quintile for stocks and at the same time in the top (bottom) quintile for CDS contracts. The combined strategy is value-weighted (long and short positions are based on firms’ market capitalization), and the holding period is one month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to equity the market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.