With the greater adoption, cryptocurrencies are not that exotic anymore. Certainly, this novel technology has already brought us many trading opportunities. With the fast development, cryptos have also attracted the focus of researchers. In some sense, the unexplored market can be an excellent playground for testing novel ideas and a thorough examination of the past effects, anomalies, and strategies identified in other markets.
The novel research identifies several crypto factors, including the size factor, which is already included in our screener. The attractive property of the size is that, similar to the other markets, it interacts with other anomalies. The paper shows that the size effect interacts with both reversal and momentum effects, but this addition is related to the reversal, so we focus on the reversal effect (and reserve the momentum effect for another addition).
By examining the momentum effect and double-sorting cryptos on both size and momentum, the authors identified a significant and robust reversal in the small cryptos.

Fundamental reason
It is hard to define any fundamental reason why the strategy should work. The effect was identified by a portfolio-sorting approach, and it was identified to be highly statistically significant, but the exact economic/behavioral reason is not provided by the paper. To better understand the effect, we suggest checking whether the reversal is driven by the mean-reversion or, perhaps, these cryptos were unnoticed in the previous weeks before the signal`s formation.
The paper also offers a robustness test and checks different lookback periods, apart from the main results for the 2-weeks periods. Results for one, three, or four weeks are qualitatively the same, and all are significant.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of cryptocurrencies from CoinMarketCap.com. Stablecoins, coins with zero prices, zero market capitalization, or zero trading volumes in all periods are omitted. Non-return variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. The market cap and prices are obtained from CoinMarketCap. As the first step, sort cryptos into five portfolios based on their week-end market cap. Secondly, sort stocks by their past 2-weeks return (momentum) into five portfolios in each size quintile. Among the three smallest portfolios, long the bottom momentum portfolios. We opt for this variant (and average the results) to ensure that the strategy would be executable and would not rely on the smallest cryptos – the effect is strong even for the cryptos with a higher market cap but reverses for the largest size quintile. We assume that the three portfolios of lowest momentum in small size quintiles are equally-weighted, but each portfolio individually is value-weighted. The strategy is rebalanced weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include any information about the usage as a possible hedge; however, the avid reader or already invested trader might find value in reversing some of long-short portfolios (if having bought some of crypto-assets) or going short legs only.