A new academic research paper shows that information extracted from the commodity futures market can predict stock returns of commodity-producing firms with the same underlying commodity. The fact that the commodity market is linked with other financial markets has already been documented and is well-known. However, there is a novel idea, that the information contained in the commodity futures market, namely, the positions of MM (Money Managers) traders – the sophisticated speculators, can predict the cross-section of stock returns for commodity producers. If the DCOT reports an increase in long position or a decrease in a short position, or an increase in net position, or an increase in the ratio of long over the short position of MM, then the stock price of the producer of the same commodity would subsequently increase in the following week as the information contained in the positions of managed money in the commodity futures market is priced in the equity market with delay. However, the predictability results hold only for the MM positions and not for the producer positions. A trading strategy based on this finding of MM traders is profitable and statistically significant and can generate a significant, and sizeable alpha. Lastly, the paper includes a lot of possibilities how to form signal or how to weigh the stocks (we have picked one possible option as a representation), where all of them are significant, profitable, and have attractive Sharpe ratios.

Fundamental reason
Every category of traders included in the DCOT report provides a unique view of the market. The focus is centred around the positions of MM traders, because these traders take speculative positions, invest other’s money, make extensive use of leverage and usually do not intend on taking delivery of the underlying commodities they are trading. But mainly because they adopt active investment strategies and tend to understand the market’s technical condition better than producers. MM positions in the commodity futures market can predict the cross-section of stock returns, while PM (producers) positions do not have such predictive power. The positions taken by MM traders in commodity futures reflect their views of the commodity’s subsequent price, and therefore this price is connected with the price of stocks of producers. Findings show the economically large and statistically significant alphas that can be attributed to the signals from MM long/short positions.
Moreover, the results are robust to a variety of choices of measures, weighting schemes and timing of lags, as well as consistent over the business cycles. These results indicate that MM traders have valuable information that predicts returns and that is not captured by already known predictors of equity returns such as general market exposure, size or momentum. The results from multivariate regressions prove that signals in the commodity futures market can indeed predict subsequent stock returns, and this effect cannot be absorbed by a set of existing determinants of stock returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all ordinary common stocks (CRSP SHRCD 10 or 11) traded on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. To match commodity-producing firms with the commodities for which the CFTC is collecting Commitment of Traders information, a simple rule is followed: for each commodity that can be associated with a four-digit U.S. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code, take all the publicly traded companies with that same four-digit SIC code. Eleven commodities are considered: 2 industrial metals – copper and steel, three precious metals – gold, silver and miscellaneous metals (platinum and palladium), four energy commodities – biofuel, natural gas, petroleum (unleaded gas, heating oil and crude oil) and coal and lastly two soft commodities – lumber and cattle.
Nextly, use the position data, and the trader classification from the CFTC’s Commitment of Traders (COT) reports. The publicly available Disaggregated Commitment of Traders (DCOT) report provides weekly information on trader’s positions. Calculate the position indicator – the long proportion growth, which is equal to the growth rate in the long positions of MM traders divided by their total positions (growth in (MMlong)/(MMshort + MMlong + 2MMspreading) ). For every selected commodity, identify the set of the firms with the corresponding industry code. This approach would generate 11 commodity portfolios. The DCOT reports are tabulated weekly from the beginning of trading on Wednesday to Tuesday’s close, which is the compilation date.
The Long-Short portfolio is constructed by sorting the commodity-stocks baskets weekly accordingly to their lagged signal variables. Long stocks with positive signal growth rates and short stocks with negative signal growth. Our data shows the strategy where no-weight is used. However, there are also other possibilities (Value-Weight alone, the Degree-Weight alone and the combination of the two).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.