No doubt, momentum is a notoriously well-known anomaly, and the anomaly is still in the scope of researchers. As a result, the momentum strategies are getting improved, and both the academics and practitioners understand the effect better. This novel research connects the momentum anomaly with the behaviour of retail investors.
Retail investors who have limited resources or capacities in analyzing the stock market are likely to rely heavily on past stock prices in making their investment decisions. If retail trading mainly reflects irrational motives, market anomalies that are caused by irrational investor behaviour should be stronger among stocks with higher levels of retail trading. Therefore, if retail trading exacerbates mispricings, the effect should be stronger in stocks with salient past price movements such as winner and loser stocks.
Research paper written by Douglas Chung confirms this deduction and shows that monthly momentum returns increase monotonically across quintile portfolios of stocks sorted by retail trading participation. The strategy uses NYSE Retail Trading Product (ReTrac) database to track retail trading.
It is also possible to use a “lottery index” methodology to identify stocks liked by retail traders, without using the ReTrac database, to have a longer backtesting sample. Stocks that are heavily traded by retail investors exhibit lottery-like features such as – low prices, high idiosyncratic volatilities/skewness, and high past maximum returns.

Fundamental reason
Retail investors who have limited resources or capacities in analyzing the stock market are likely to rely heavily on past stock prices in making their investment decisions. If retail trading mainly reflects irrational motives, market anomalies that are caused by irrational investor behaviour should be stronger among stocks with higher levels of retail trading. Therefore, if retail trading exacerbates mispricings, the effect should be stronger in stocks with salient past price movements such as winner and loser stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks traded on NYSE. Investor obtains the end-of-day NYSE retail buy and sell volumes for individual stocks from the NYSE Retail Trading Product (ReTrac) database (https://www.nyse.com/market-data/historical/nyse-retrac-protrac-eod). The RTP of a stock is the monthly ratio of the retail trading volume to the total trading volume (a larger RTP implies more retail trading in a stock). Each month, investor sorts individual stocks on their RTP into five groups, ranging from RTP1 (low retail trading, below 20th percentile) to RTP5 (high retail trading, above 80th percentile). Within each RTP group, he further sorts stocks on their Mom (t-12 to t-2 months) into five groups, ranging from Mom1 (losers, below 20th percentile) to Mom5 (winners, above 80th percentile).
Investor goes long high momentum stocks from RTP5 group and short low momentum stocks from RTP5 group. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk, therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during time of market crisis.