The literature recognizes (and also our screener includes) the concept of positive and negative semivariance. Therefore, we can identify “good” and “bad” volatility of the asset based on the decomposition of the variance into positive and negative semivariance. The similar can be done with another well-known proxy for the volatility – beta. Beta is an essential part of the CAPM model and indicates the covariance of the asset and the market. The beta is based on the covariance of asset returns and market returns and intuitively, similar to the semivariance, there can be constructed two beta measures conditioned on the market return (downside version of the CAPM). Upside beta, when the market return is positive and downside beta when the market return is negative. The past research has studied both betas, but according to this novel research, there are four possibilities and not just two. Semibetas can be calculated if both returns are positive, both returns are negative, and either market return is positive, and the return of the asset is negative or vice versa. Therefore, using intra-day returns, four different semi-betas can be constructed, where each has a different risk premium. The covariation that stems from two semibetas where the market return is positive should not earn a risk premium.
On the other hand, the covariation that stems from semibetas, where the market return is negative earns a significant risk premium. According to the results, stocks with larger negative semibeta are associated with high subsequent daily returns, stocks with larger semibeta when the market return is negative, and the return of the asset is positive are associated with subsequent low returns. The rest of the semibetas (for positive market return) are not connected with any significant risk premium.
The effect can be utilized in a strategy, where one bet on negative semibeta and bets against semibeta where the market return is negative, and the return of the asset is positive. Baseline results are based on daily rebalancing, but the strategy works even with longer rebalancing periods (weekly or monthly) and can survive transaction costs. The paper includes many variants of the strategy (rebalancing periods), but also partially-adjusted portfolio approach with transaction costs. We would refer to the “basic” variant without transaction costs and daily rebalancing. See the performance of the strategy with monthly rebalancing and a variant with transaction costs on the figure at the bottom of the page.

Fundamental reason
The theory behind semibetas is quite old as both Hogan and Warren (1974), and Bawa and Lindenberg (1977) researched the mean-semivariance asset pricing theory. According to the literature, only two semibetas should carry a significant risk premium. The first semibeta accounts for joint negative covariation and has a positive premium. The second is associated with the negative market and positive asset return variation and carries a negative premium. This academic research is in line with the literature; however, the results are novel and widely applicable in the investing practice. The risk premium for the first semibeta is significantly positive, while the risk premium for the second semibeta is significantly negative. Hence, the effect can be exploited by betting on and against the correct semibetas. The semibetas can be easily calculated using intraday returns, and it was shown by Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2004) that with the rising frequency of high-frequency returns, realized betas consistently estimate the actual latent betas.
Most importantly, the strategy is applicable and survives the trading costs. Moreover, it was backtested using S&P500 constituents; therefore, it only includes large caps and minimizes risks of liquidity or shorting small stocks. Last but not least, the trading strategy is robust to various rebalancing periods, and the effect persists from one day to one month. Still, the performance decreases with the increasing holding period.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P 500 constituent stocks. Firstly, consider signed high-frequency intraday market returns and signed asset returns for each stock. The positive signed return is equal to the maximum of the intraday return for the given period or zero. The negative signed return is the minimum of the intraday return for the given period or zero. Considering the 15-min sampling scheme (in other words, 26 intraday returns), calculate the intraday returns. At a given day, the negative semibeta is calculated as the sum of the product of negative signed return and negative signed market return divided by the sum of the squared negative signed market return. The semibeta for negative market and positive asset return is calculated as the sum of the product of negative signed return and positive signed market return divided by the sum of the squared negative signed market return. Sums use all 26 15-minutes intraday periods. For both semibetas, sort stocks into quintiles according to their semibetas. Construct two value-weighted portfolios. The first portfolio consists of betting on negative semibeta; therefore go long the top quintile and short the bottom quintile. The second portfolio consists of betting against the semibeta for negative market and positive asset return; therefore go long the bottom quintile and short the highest quintile. The two portfolios are equally-weighted and rebalanced daily.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - According to the Figure 5, the strategy suffers during recession periods.