The best effects for trading are anomalies which arise from the liquidity demand of some market participants. This kind of edge is usually long-lasting as liquidity demand usually doesn’t suddenly disappear. One such anomaly is the liquidity demand for mutual and pension funds connected with the end of each month. A lot of academic papers shows that the performance of equities is usually higher around the turn of the month (especially during the first few days of the new month). We present an academic study with interesting finding – it shows that turn of the month effect is prevalent even in the cross-section of stock returns. Stocks with the strongest performance during days T-8 to T-4 before the turn of the month show strong reversal and very weak performance during days T-3 to T+3 (actual turn of the month). On the other hand, stocks with the weakest performance during days T-8 to T-4 show very strong performance during days T-3 to T+3. Profitable market neutral trading strategy with a low correlation to other market anomalies can be therefore created based on this interesting effect.

Fundamental reason
Anomaly is related to the turn of the monthly payment cycle of pension funds, mutual funds, corporations and other institutions. Due to this cycle, potentially billions of dollars invested in the stock market get liquidated every month just a few days prior to the month-end and distributed as cash to pensioners, employees, and recipients of corporate or mutual fund dividends. To meet their month-end cash liabilities on time, all institutions and individuals whose liquid funds are invested in the equity market must sell their stocks at least three business days before the month-end, following the most common settlement rule of the developed stock markets. As a result, for some time period preceding the third business day before month-end, T-3 (T refers to the last day of the month), the market must absorb a large amount of order flow to accommodate the sellers’ liquidity needs. Authors also find evidence that the turn of the month returns and return reversals varies as a function of stocks’ liquidity. In particular, they find that month-end reversals are statistically more significant for larger and more liquid stocks, suggesting that funds and other investors
respond to month-end outflows and cash needs conscious of transaction costs.

Similarly, they find that following the end of the month, the first three days’ returns revert only for liquid stocks. For illiquid stocks, it seems that the investors’ purchases are more gradual and continue past the first three days, causing positive, not negative autocorrelation in returns between the first three days’ returns and the returns after that. This again is consistent with the idea that market participants are conscious of their price impact in the stock market when taking positions at the beginning of each month.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ stocks (CRSP universe) with a share price above $5 and a market capitalization that exceeds the NYSE 10th market capitalization percentile. Each month, investor sorts the stocks in the investment universe into deciles based on their performance over the period where selling pressure can be expected – T-8 to T-4. The investor then goes long stocks from the worst performance decile and goes short stocks from the best performance decile during days T-3 to T+3 (portfolio is liquidated at market close T+3). The portfolio is equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. Strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into 2 parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is; however needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.