A payoff of an option can be replicated by trading the underlying stock and risk-free bond. In this framework, a delta-hedged portfolio consisting of a long position in a call (put) option hedged by a short (long) position in the underlying stock earns a risk-free interest rate with continuous hedging. The main idea is to reduce or hedge the directional risk associated with price movements in the underlying stock. However, the literature documents that the delta-hedged option portfolios significantly underperform the risk-free rate. Academics attribute the underperformance to a number of reasons, such as a volatility risk premium under stochastic volatility, volatility misestimation, option demand pressure, and the characteristics of the underlying stocks. In this context, Cochrane (2011) posed the question: “Which characteristics provide independent information about average returns?” A novel study by Shafaati, Chance, and Brooks (2021) attempts and filter out the characteristics that explain delta-hedged portfolio returns by imposing sparsity on a set of 107 candidate variables. In particular, the authors employ the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) method to identify the option- and stock-related characteristics that provide incremental information for the performance of delta-hedged portfolios. The forecasting models selected by the LASSO method demonstrate superior performance in predicting the delta-hedged option returns out-of-sample, outperforming the models estimated using Fama and MacBeth’s (1973) regressions. Naturally, an accurate forecasting model, such as the one created using the LASSO method, can be utilized to form a profitable trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
If options are perfectly replicable by trading their underlying stocks and risk-free bond, delta-hedged option returns should be unpredictable. Nonetheless, previous studies such as Cao et al. (2021) confirmed systematic patterns in the cross-section of options suggesting that the delta-hedged returns are predictable. Using a shrinkage method, like LASSO, one can examine a large set of predictors simultaneously. A sufficiently large penalty will cause some of the coefficients to be precisely zero and identify a subset of characteristics with nonzero coefficients that provide incremental information for the cross-section of delta-hedged returns. Note that the authors emphasize the necessity of the rolling model as there is time variation in the set of selected characteristics.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of American equity options and their underlying stocks. The options data and the stock returns are obtained from the OptionMetrics and CRSP database, respectively. The balance sheet data are from the Standard and Poor’s Compustat database, and the analyst coverage and forecast data are collected from I/B/E/S. Firstly, eliminate all options with characteristics summarized in the online appendix: OA2. Option Data Filtering Procedure, e.g. non standard settlement, violating of no-arbitrage condition, early exercise, extreme prices and others. Secondly, construct a set of explanatory variables consisting of 8 option-related and 99 stock-related characteristics. The option-related characteristics are open interest, option-trading volume, option demand pressure, the difference between historical and implied volatility, relative bid-ask spread, volatility of volatility, and skewness and kurtosis of volatility. The calculation of these variables is explained in Appendix OA3: Calculation of Option Level Characteristics. The complete list of option-related and stock-related characteristics variables is summarized in Table 2. Thirdly, construct delta-hedged portfolios, consisting of a long position in a call option hedged by a short position in the underlying stock. Every month, sort the delta-hedged option portfolios into equally-weighted deciles based on their predicted returns in the subsequent month. Predicted returns are derived from option- and stock-level characteristics and coefficients are estimated by the LASSO method. Determine the penalty parameter in the LASSO method by five-fold cross-validation. Use the latest ten years of delta-hedged returns and characteristics data to perform model selection and estimation and forecast the return over the subsequent month. Then, roll the selection and estimation sample forward by one month to obtain the new coefficient estimate, keeping the sample window as ten years. The trading rule for the strategy is as follows: each month, buy the highest decile (delta-hedged option portfolios with the highest forecasted returns) and sell the lowest decile (delta-hedged option portfolios with the lowest forecasted returns). Therefore, the strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The delta-hedging can eliminate the directional risk – if it is continuously adjusted. However, the volatility risk stays. Therefore, a more detailed analysis should be performed to examine the strategy’s performance during market underperformance.