Merger arbitrage is a classical arbitrage trading strategy trying to exploit inefficiencies in the stock price of a company which has agreed to be sold to another company for cash, stock, or a combination of both. This classical strategy could be improved by observing the reaction of investors on merger announcement. The research paper shows that the Initial Target Price (ITP) ratio, which is the target firm stock price on the first day after the announcement relative to the offer price, can be interpreted as a measure of investor optimism regarding deal outcomes. Target stocks with high ITP ratios earn significantly negative returns in 2 months following the merger announcement. Traders can form a profitable trading strategy by shorting stocks with high ITP ratios and hedging their position by going long stocks with low ITP ratios. Strategy’s result is presented for large-cap stocks (significantly higher return could be achieved by trading smaller stocks, but traders must take into consideration trading costs and slippage).

Fundamental reason
The ratio of the target firm stock price on the first day after the announcement to the offer price, the initial target price (ITP), reflects investors’ anticipation of eventual outcomes of the acquisition attempt. Academic research states that if investors are fully rational in interpreting the information contained in acquisition announcements the ITP ratio will be positively associated with the likelihood of deal success, but will not predict abnormal returns to the target firm after the announcement. On the other hand, if investors overreact to the positive information contained in the takeover announcement, then the ITP ratio will overestimate the probability of deal consummation and be negatively associated with future abnormal returns to the target firm, and vice versa. High ITP ratios predict surprisingly low likelihoods of deal consummation, as well as negative abnormal returns to target firms following the announcement. These findings suggest that those cases where investors are most optimistic regarding deal outcomes, as reflected in high ITP ratios, are, in fact, characterized by investor overreaction to the new information. The academic paper also finds somewhat weaker evidence that low ITP ratios indicate investor underreaction to the new information contained in the merger announcement.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks from NYSE/AMEX/Nasdaq. Each day, investor monitors merger and acquisition announcements. Merger and acquisition deals from the previous three years are used to create decile breakpoints for the initial target price. If a new deal is announced, the investor goes short, the target company in case ITP is in the highest decile. Investor goes long target company in case ITP is in the lowest decile. Each company in the portfolio is held for two months. The portfolio is equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. See source academic paper, table 4 panel B for large stocks, the 2-month short return of 2,36%.