The bond duration is a widely popular theory among bonds investors. Naturally, there were several attempts to implement this approach also to the equities. The most critical limitations of stocks are the unpredictability of future cash inflows and their lifespan. Based on those, it is rather challenging to apply fixed income metrics to “unfixed” assets. Despite this, the author introduced three models concerning stock duration estimation. One of them, regarding “bond-likeliness,” solves the aforementioned issues by investigating the relationship between the monthly excess returns of stocks and a 10-year US Treasury futures contract. Thus the bond-beta estimate helps to identify the stocks with bonds similarities and indirectly provides us with the proxy for duration. The paper demonstrated that low-duration stocks tend to be more “bond-like” and vice versa. Such stocks are expected to generate more stable income in the near future. As results showed, CAPM betas increase with growing duration, but most importantly, alphas are the highest under conditions of low equity duration. The long-short duration factor induces positive and significant alphas through the whole examined period, even post-crisis. However, the crisis milestone seems to flip the relationship between the duration and value factor from positive to fiercely negative. Moreover, stocks with lower duration are likely to be higher in value and more profitable, while demanding lower investment and undergone risk.

Fundamental reason
The logic behind the strategy is very straightforward. Duration is commonly defined as an asset’s sensitivity to changes in interest rate. If we consider the negative correlation between the development of stock prices and interest rates, it is clear that one should seek stable equities with lower sensitivity to exogenous changes; therefore, low equity duration is favorable. As is it rather challenging to estimate and forecast future stock dividends and prices, “bond-likeness” sheds new light on the issue. If a particular stock shares similarities with fixed income, it indicates that the company pays constant dividends and the asset is not volatile, which are preferable characteristics. Therefore, we may expect higher returns on portfolios consisting of such stocks. This finding is also supported by Baker (2009), Wurgler (2012), and Koijen et al. (2017), who scrutinized the same issue in a different time frame.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of CRSP stocks with prices above 5$ and market cap above 1 billion. Firstly, for each stock in the sample, run five-year rolling regressions where the dependent variable is the monthly excess return of the stock. The explanatory variables include intercept, excess stock market return, and excess 10-year US Treasury futures contract return. The coefficient for excess bond return is considered to be the bond beta or “bond-likeness”. Secondly, sort the stocks based on the duration (bond-beta) into quintiles. Create quintile portfolios and go long on the first 20% (first quintile – the most “bond-like” stocks), and go short on the last 20% (fifth quintile – the least “bond-like” stocks). The strategy is rebalanced monthly and equally-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - According to Table 3, the strategy has sizeable and statistically significantly negative market beta (-0.469).