As there are differences from market to market, China seems like an ideal place to study behavioural finance in the stock market. Its total market value is very large, and many global indexes are including it, but many of the investors are non-professional individuals. Such retail investors tend to be more prone to behavioural biases and react disproportionally to news they receive.
Studies in behavioural finance tend to focus on the US market, but exactly because of the investor structure of the market, it seems more than reasonable to look at China. Despite having a large portion of retail investors, not many studies focusing on the relationship of behaviour and asset price have been conducted here. The main idea of this research is to find how to capture undervalued stocks, where the undervaluation is caused by investors underreacting to the news. The authors conduct quantitative research based on approximating ‘undervalue’ score by five different proxies, shown in previous studies to be tied to investor underreaction. By sorting a portfolio according to this score, the trader can see which stocks are the most under/over-valued and utilize them in the strategy.

Fundamental reason
Not all market anomalies appear in every market to the same extent. China’s A-share market is very specific because retail investors largely dominate its investor structure. Those often trade very differently from corporations and institutions, which gives rise to relatively unusual price movements in the market. Essentially, individuals are more prone to behavioural biases, emotional trading, and not appropriately reacting to the news, causing stock mispricing. Even though traders in China tend to rather overreact to news, it is not uncommon for them to also underreact, causing undervaluation of the stock. This strategy longs such stocks before the mispricing is corrected in the market.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of China A-Share stocks from Shanghai (SSE) and Shenzen (SZSE) exchanges. Stocks under special treatment (ST stocks), stocks that went public within 12 months before sorting, and stocks whose trading has been suspended and stayed at the limit up for the whole day of the calculation day are excluded. For calculation of the sorting score, we use the following proxy variables: Standardized unexpected earnings (SUE), ROA, Accruals, Momentum, and Liquidity shock (see table 1, panel B on page 6). To calculate the underreaction score, do the following:
For each anomaly variable, adjust the sign, so the correlation with returns is positive. Turn variable value into a rank – a higher value means a higher rank. As the final underreaction score, take the averaged ranking of those five anomaly variables.
Sort stocks into deciles according to this score. Long the highest-ranking decile, short the lowest (underreaction is correlated with positive future returns). The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

We use US stocks as investment universe in the out-of-sample backtest, as we do not have enough chinese ADR stocks with filled fundamental values for accruals & ROA.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include enough information to be sure about any possible uses as a hedge.