Many traders throughout time have made use of a variety of portfolios surrounding hedging using derivatives. The authors, through this paper, look to study the market intraday momentum in the derivatives market. In particular, the positive relation and hence predictive power of the first 30 minutes of trading activity in a day on the final 30 minutes of the trading day.

This relation was studied using data on various markets from 1974 to 2020 and seemed to appear strongly across all markets. In addition to showcasing the existence of this notion, the authors look to delve deeper and provide an explanation; they conclude gamma hedging demand is an important driver among other factors also pointed out across the paper.

We clearly see enough evidence to imply that the market intraday momentum effect does indeed exist, and so make use of it through a trading strategy. A strategy involving the purchasing of futures derivatives in the final 30 minutes of the trading day that showcased positive intraday momentum through two different indicators.

Fundamental reason
One of the main reasons that the authors point to when explaining the positive correlation between the movement in the first 30 minutes of the trading day and the final 30 minutes in derivatives markets is the increased demand for gamma hedging. The “gamma” greek is mentioned in trading abundantly, and it measures the rate of change of a derivative’s delta following a change in the underlying securities price. Traders are known to want to reduce the gamma of their portfolio to help reduce portfolio volatility and hence, they are known to use derivatives to hedge their portfolios and reduce gamma. In practice, they will often do this right after the market opens or just before the market closes. This behaviour is common because traders will look to either react to overnight market changes at opening or protect against overnight changes right before close. Generally, we also find a lot of hedging activity occurs towards the end of the trading day as there is most information on markets across the day available to traders to use for hedging; traders avoid having to hedge again due to unforeseen changes in the market. Additionally, within the paper, the authors also point out other psychological and theoretical reasons why traders leave their hedging activity for the end of the trading day or the start of the trading day.

To further test this, the authors of the paper look to test the general relationship between hedging demand and time left to market close. Through data obtained from testing using the S&P500 and Leveraged ETFs, they find that traders do show patterns in hedging in the final 30 minutes, or first 30 minutes, of the trading day and then extend this to gamma hedging demand too.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all futures contracts in the equity/commodities/fixed income/Forex derivatives market (we picked equity futures). The variables of interest are the return (ONFH) and return (ROD). The return (ONFH) today = the return generated if we were to buy the security at yesterday’s closing price and then sell it at its price 30 minutes after today’s market opening. The return (ROD) today = the return generated if we were to buy the security at yesterday’s closing price and sell it at the price 30 minutes before market close today. Both variables are used as predictors for return (LH) = return in the last half an hour of today’s trading day. We look at the sign of both of these variables and if both are positive we have a buy signal and if both aren’t positive we do not. Using these signals, we go long on the future if we have a buy signal. All futures are weighted equally and the portfolio is rebalanced on an intraday basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -