Index funds have become extremely popular over the last 20 years, and one of the most popular indices for tracking is the S&P 500 Index. The “index effect” refers to the price pressure that is observed when a stock is added to or deleted from an index. If the index is widely tracked, then profits can be made by buying (selling) the shares of the added (deleted) firm ahead of the index funds and selling (buying) them at a later stage when the index funds demand (supply) is satisfied. For many years, “buying additions and selling deletions” has been a lucrative strategy for investors not involved in index tracking. A close-to-close positive effect observed one day after the announcement of addition could not be traded. However, profitable trading opportunities occur between the first day after the announcement and the date of the actual event. The simple strategy presented could even be enhanced by intraday trading and by shorting stocks after the effective date.

Fundamental reason
Numerous explanations have been proposed to explain the index addition effect. The Liquidity Effect Hypothesis states that since the S&P 500 is tracked by the majority of leading index funds, inclusion should enhance the liquidity of the underlying stock. As liquidity ensures the ability to sell a stock immediately (and at an appropriate price), then the increase in the stock’s liquidity could result in an increase in its price due to lower transaction costs. The Information Content Hypothesis states that an important piece of information is revealed (which should have a permanent effect on prices) when a stock is included in the index. The Price Pressure Hypothesis (PPH) states that investors who provide liquidity to the market without having any motivation to trade should be compensated by a premium that reflects their extra costs and the risks of these trades.

Simple trading strategy
The investor should buy stocks announced to be included in the S&P 500 index at the close one day after the announcement day. He/she should sell those stocks at the close on an effective day. The general market could be shorted for hedging.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only. Therefore, it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities; therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).