Corporate managers, as insiders, should have the best knowledge about the probable value of the firm they manage (and it’s over/under-valuation). Academic research suggests that corporate managers undertake financing decisions to take advantage of firm-specific misevaluation. Evidence from equity or debt financing and long-run returns suggest that firms tend to issue equity or risky debt when they are over-valued and to buy back equity or retire risky debt when they are undervalued. The investor can use these signals (equity/debt repurchases and new offerings) as a guide showing a possible over or undervaluation. These signals could then be used to construct an equity long-short strategy.

Fundamental reason
As already stated in the “Short description” section, firms undertake new issues or repurchases to exploit mispricing; such events should reflect information possessed by managers about stock mispricing.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks (not stated in the source paper, but we assume so). Stocks are divided into two parts – an overvalued portfolio and an under-valued portfolio. Firms with Initial Public Offerings (IPOs), Seasoned Equity Offerings (SEOs), and debt offerings (including both straight and convertible debt) in the past 24 months are part of the overvalued portfolio. The undervalued portfolio contains firms that have annual equity or debt reduction exceeding 1% of its average total assets in either of the two most recent fiscal years. Firms that satisfy both the criteria for overvalued and undervalued are excluded from both portfolios. The investor goes long on the undervalued portfolio and short on the overvalued portfolio. Trading/rebalancing is done yearly at the end of each June, and stocks are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.