In recent years, the percentage of stocks in the market held by institutional investors has dramatically increased. That’s why, as the author mentions, it is important to be able to understand the institutional investors’ behavior well. It has been shown in multiple studies that it is often very different from the behavior of retail investors.
Market factors are generally divided into macro-related factors and non-macro-related, otherwise called characteristic factors. As the author states in the study, the macro-related factors are innovations of macro variables, which can affect future investment opportunities according to the ICAPM. He considers 11 of them – consumption, TFP, industrial production, default spread, term spread, unexpected/expected inflation change, aggregate market volatility, labor income, and surplus ratio constructed according to Campbell and Cochrane (1999). Characteristic factors are portfolios sorted on firm characteristics, such as Fama-French factors, q5 factors, mispricing factors, AQR quality factor, gross profitability factor, and momentum, all of these researched by the author in the paper. While studies show that beta-sorted portfolios on both macro-related and characteristic factors have small return spreads, the author finds that within the high institutional ownership group, the macro-related factors generate a high return premium. This means that in stocks dominantly held by institutions, the risk is better priced. So in the high institutional ownership group, macro-related factors are present instead of characteristic factors. By constructing a composite strategy for the 11 mentioned macro-related factors, a significant long-short trading strategy is obtained.

Fundamental reason
In classic fundamental financial models and theories, institutions are more likely to behave as rational, risk-averse investors, and make decisions less influenced by behavioral factors. This is consistent with the idea that, essentially, macro-related factors proxy for risk, while the characteristic factors proxy for mispricing in the market. The author studies this market anomaly cross-sectionally, and his findings indicate that the high return premium in high residual institutional ownership (RIO) stocks cannot be explained by time variation, which indicates a strong investor heterogeneity.
According to the above conjecture, in stocks held mostly by institutions, who are generally more likely to follow risk-return trade-off, factors containing fundamental risks(macro-related factors) will be priced, while factors capturing mispricing (characteristic factors) will go by almost unnoticed.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks. Data on institutional ownership is extracted from WRDS Thomson Reuters Institutional (13f) Holdings database. If a stock is reported in the CRSP, but there is no data on institutional ownership, it is assumed to have this value at 0.
This strategy is a composite of the factors studied in the paper. Therefore, there are 11 considered macro factors: Consumption (CON), Total Factor Productivity (TFP), Industrial Production (IPG), Default Spread (DEF), Term Spread (TERM), Unexpected Inflation (UI), Change in Expected Inflation (DEI), Market Excess Return (MKT), Aggregate Market Volatility (VOL), Labor Income (LAB), Surplus Ratio (SUR). DEF and VOL are countercyclical variables, so it is needed to adjust for their risk premium to be positive. In these two factors, portfolios are to be constructed in descending order of beta, where the highest risk quintile corresponds to the lowest beta and vice versa. Data sources and details for all factors are described on page 9.
For each of these factors, for each stock, calculate the factor beta following the regression on page 12, using the data from the previous 5 years. Based on this, assign the stock a beta percentile ranking. Once this is done for all factors, calculate the beta percentile average for every stock. Sort the stocks into quintiles based on this value. Independently, sort the stocks into quintiles according to their residual institutional ownership (RIO), calculated using the regression (2) on page 7. In high RIO portfolio, long the highest risk quintile, short the lowest, and in the low RIO portfolio, long the lowest risk quintile, and short the highest. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced quarterly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -