Classical momentum methodology has been tested in every financial market with promising results. Multiple researchers often combine simple momentum with a trend-following filter to achieve more attractive risk-adjusted results. A diversified portfolio of asset classes promises the higher return levels associated with momentum portfolios but with much-reduced volatility and drawdowns due to trend following and diversification effect.

Fundamental reason
Trend following is generally rules-based so it can help to overcome investor’s behavioural biases by mechanically cutting losers while winners are let to run. This methodology removes negative fat tails from return distribution. Exploited momentum effect helps to increase the strategy’s final performance.

Simple trading strategy
Investment universe consists of ~90 futures/ETFs divided into five major asset classes – developed equities, emerging equities, bonds, commodities and REITs. Each month, trend following filter, based on a ten-month signal, is applied to the indicated broad asset classes; in the event that a broad asset class is estimated to be in a downtrend the asset class’ default holding of 20% is placed in the “risk-off” asset class, US T-Bills. If the asset class is in an uptrend, then he executes the performance ranking of the sub-components within each asset class using 12 months of return data standardized by the prior 12-month volatility. He then invests in the top 50% of sub-component performers, that is, the top half of ‘winners’. Broad asset classes are weighted equally (20% each) and subclasses are also weighted equally. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The selected strategy is a class of “Tactical asset allocation” strategies like the one proposed by Mebane Faber in his famous paper “A Quantitative Approach to Tactical Asset Allocation”. The selected strategy contains equities and TAA strategy tries to rotate out of them during the time of stress. Therefore the proposed strategy isn’t mainly used as an add-on to the portfolio to hedge equity risk directly. Still, it is more an overlay which can be used to manage the percentual representation of equities (or “equity-like assets”) in a portfolio. Tactical asset allocation framework can decrease the overall risk of equities in a portfolio, and it can improve the risk-adjusted returns.

