Traditional momentum and reversal strategies are so popular that it is even worthy of consideration if they are profitable anymore. On the other hand, there seems to be a profitable version of both strategies, especially if the pure price of the stocks is accompanied by other information such as stock’s turnover. A new academic research paper has shown that stocks with high disagreement exhibit short-term momentum, whereas stocks with low disagreement exhibit the well-known short-term reversal eﬀect. As a proxy for disagreement, one can simply use the turnover of stock. Whereas the short-term reversal is strongest for stocks with low turnover, this strong short-term reversal eﬀect is completely overturned for high-turnover stocks, and these stocks exhibit short-term momentum.
Additionally, neither short-term momentum nor short-term reversal can be explained by standard risk factors, including the conventional momentum factor and the traditional short-term reversal factor. The aforementioned finding leads to a simple strategy – buying last month’s winners and shorting last month’s losers among high-turnover stocks yields a signiﬁcantly positive average excess return and short-term reversal strategy among low-turnover stocks generates a signiﬁcant average excess return as well. Last but not least, for practical usage of the strategy, it is important that the strategy is signiﬁcant among the largest and most liquid stocks (even more than among the small caps), and these results are not limited to the U.S. market since the results also hold in an international sample of 22 developed markets.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the results of the paper suggest that there are two competing forces, reversal and momentum. Both of these forces coexist and push short-term returns in opposite directions. The paper has provided and investigated a simple equilibrium model to characterize this battle for short-term returns and to rationalize why reversal dominates for some stocks. At the same time, momentum is the dominant force for other stocks. In this model, heterogeneous investors disagree about the informativeness of their signals and trade on informational diﬀerences. Therefore, a simple turnover arises as a measure of disagreement. The proposed model predicts that the returns of low-turnover stocks reﬂect noise trading, and therefore, these stocks exhibit reversal.
On the other hand, the returns to high-turnover stocks reﬂect the gradual diﬀusion of private information and thus exhibit momentum. Secondly, in the equilibrium, the returns of high-turnover stocks are more likely to be driven by private information. In contrast, the returns of low-turnover stocks are more likely to be driven by noise trading. If informed investors observe a large realization of their private signal, then this event has two eﬀects. Turnover will be high because of the disagreement between the informed and uninformed investors, and the price will move because it will partially impound the private signal. However, the price will not fully impound the private signal precisely due to disagreement, what would cause a continuation of the movement in the same direction (momentum). To sum it up, high-turnover stocks are those with new private information and such information is only slowly incorporated into prices, leading to momentum for high-turnover stocks. Price-movements in low turnover stocks are driven by non-informational noise trading, and such price-movements will be subsequently corrected, leading to reversal for low-turnover stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all common shares (CRSP’s SHRCD 10 and 11) traded on NYSE, AMEX and Nasdaq. Short-term performance is measured using the return over the previous month, and the share turnover is deﬁned as the total number of trades (CRSP’s VOL times 100 to get actual values) deﬂated by the number of shares outstanding (CRSP’s SHROUT times 1000 to get actual values). Firstly, sort the stocks into two groups – large and small caps, where the breakpoint for size is the median for NYSE stocks. From now on, consider only large caps. Secondly, sort stocks on returns over the previous month and then sort the stocks again on turnover. The breakpoints for return and turnover are the 20th and 80th percentiles for NYSE stocks. The final portfolio is composed of two equally-weighted portfolios. The first portfolio consists of buying last month’s losers and shorting previous month’s winners within the stocks with the lowest turnover. The second portfolio consists of buying previous month’s winners and shorting last month’s losers within the stocks with the highest turnover. Both portfolios are value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.