Firstly, Betting-Against-Beta is a well-known and used strategy also presented in our Screener (strategy number 77). Simply said, the low-beta anomaly is a tendency of securities with low betas to outperform assets with high betas. Past research has proved that taking a long position in a leveraged portfolio of low-beta securities, while simultaneously short-selling the deleveraged portfolio of high-beta assets, produces strong and robust profits. Novel research has successfully tried to improve the performance of this strategy by the correct timing and the usage of more international markets where this strategy could be traded. This research has shown that the performance of small firms in the stock market is a predictor of the future performance of the traditional Betting-Against-Beta strategy. Moreover, this dependence is both strong and robust, yielding implications for BAB return predictability in both cross-section and time-series. According to the author, there can be found a link between the asset liquidity—manifested in the short-term performance of the small companies—and the funding liquidity that affects the profitability of the low-beta strategies.
A finding that the short-term performance of the small minus big (SMB) portfolios during the past three months predicts the future payoffs on the BAB factors leads to a simple, yet both statistically and economically significant strategy. The idea leads to an equal-weighted portfolio (the performance is driven mainly by the small stocks. However, the paper presents results also for the value-weighted variant) of the long position in betting-against-beta strategies in 20% of countries with the highest trailing three-month SMB return and short position in the 20% of countries with the lowest SMB return.

Fundamental reason
According to the author, there is a link between the asset liquidity—manifested in the short-term performance of the small companies—and the funding liquidity that affects the profitability of the low-beta strategies. The aforementioned phenomenon is augmented by the fact that the betting-against-beta (BAB) portfolios are strongly exposed to low-capitalization firms. Therefore, the short-term rise in prices of small firm companies would naturally lead to improved funding conditions in the subsequent periods. To be more precise, the low-beta strategy is strongly concentrated in low-capitalization companies, and the change in prices is likely to affect the value of the collateral used by the traders. The traders (or hedge funds, dealers, investment banks or other financial companies) usually require some fixed percentage value of the collateral to trade on margin. In consequence, the growth of the collateral and the trader’s capital improve funding conditions by allowing borrowing more funds in subsequent periods. This process creates additional future demand for the stocks traded on margin. Considering the BAB strategy, low-beta companies are leveraged to make the beta of the long side of the trade equal to one. Aforementioned leads to additional demand that pushes the prices of the low-beta stocks upward and this whole process would result in temporarily elevated returns. Consistent with past research, the reduced liquidity risk temporarily improves the performance of the low-beta strategy. Last but not least, any abnormal returns connected with the BAB strategy are generated in the months following the positive small-minus-big payoff in the preceding month, whereas, in the remaining periods, the BAB strategy produces hardly any alpha.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks of the 24 developed markets covered by AQR factors: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The strategy is simple, every month, sort the betting against beta (BAB) strategies in the 24 examined markets on the past average geometric return on the small minus big (SMB) factors in the respective countries. More precisely, divide the countries (and their stocks) into two groups, those with the 20% of highest and 20% of the lowest average SMB return in months t-3 to t-1. Subsequently, form a long portfolio which contains the BAB strategy for the countries with the highest average SMB return in months t-3 to t-1 and short portfolio which contain the BAB strategy for the countries with the lowest average SMB return in months t-3 to t-1. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.