The predictability of future stock returns based on various firm characteristics is diminishing over time, most likely due to improving market liquidity and investors’ knowledge acquired from academic literature. However, multiple research papers suggest that momentum is one of the most robust anomalies. Recent research tests the robustness of momentum strategy, implementing it across 15 well-documented anomalies, namely: failure probability, O-Score, net stock issuance, composite equity issuance, total accruals, net operating assets, momentum, gross profitability, asset growth, return on assets, abnormal capital investment, unexpected standardized earnings, analyst dispersion, idiosyncratic volatility, and the book-to-market ratio. Implementing a strategy, which longs a subset of 15 top anomaly portfolios and shorts a subset of 15 bottom anomaly portfolios based on past one-month returns, earns abnormal average return between 1.27% and 1.47% per month (risk-adjusted return between 0.77% and 0.91%). Such a strategy consistently outperformed a naïve strategy that weights the anomalies equally. Moreover, in accordance with the findings by Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012), the authors found that the strategy yields higher risk-adjusted returns after the periods of high investor sentiment.

Fundamental reason
Even though the individual performance of these anomalies is recording a declining tendency over time, even naive strategy investing in each of the anomalies in equal proportion generates high positive returns, while reducing the downside risk present when investing in individual anomalies. Then applying an active investment strategy, which sorts the anomalies based on their t-1 performance (i.e. applying momentum across anomalies), further enhances performance.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks, whose price data are available at the CRSP database.

First, the investor creates 30 portfolios, two (top and bottom) for each anomaly noted in the description, based on the lagged one-month (t-1) firm-specific variable underlying the anomaly. Specifically, the top 15 portfolios comprise of 10% of the stocks with the lowest failure probability, lowest O-Score, lowest net stock issuance, lowest composite equity issuance, lowest total accruals, lowest net operating assets, highest past six-month returns, highest gross profitability, lowest asset growth, highest return on assets, lowest abnormal capital investment, highest standardized unexpected earnings, lowest analyst dispersion, lowest idiosyncratic volatility, or a highest book-to-market ratio (vice versa for the bottom 15; see Appendix A for variable definitions).

The investor then further sorts the portfolios according to their previous month’s (t-1) returns and goes long on the three best-performing anomalies and short on the three worst-performing anomalies. Rebalancing and holding periods are both one month. Stocks in the portfolios are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.