Earnings announcement days attract investor’s attention as companies show their actual performance and future prospects. It is, therefore, no surprise that stocks are more wild during days close to the earnings announcement. Informed investors (who have likely better information than ordinary retail investors) often choose option markets to express their views about future stocks performance. Academic research shows that it is possible to extract this information from relative prices of matched put and call options. Research states that information from put-call parity prices is especially useful during earnings announcement as abnormal returns to a portfolio that buys stocks with relatively expensive call options is considerably greater than the abnormal returns to a portfolio that buys stocks with relatively expensive put options.

Fundamental reason
Research states that option prices may convey information about future stock returns if informed traders have a preference for the options market as a trading venue. Therefore information is reflected in the options market before it is reflected in the stock market. Research says that if some investors have private information about future price increases (decreases), then they would demand more call (put) options which will increase the implied volatilities of call (put) options with respect to put (call) options. Therefore, the di¤erence between put and call implied volatilities would increase (decrease) before stock price decreases (increases). It is logical that if the trading activity of informed traders is an important driver of deviations from put-call parity, then the predictability of stock returns should be more pronounced during major information events such as earnings announcements.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of firms from NYSE, Amex and Nasdaq with liquid options. Volatility spread is calculated at the end of the day before the earnings announcement. Single volatility spread measure for each stock in each day is calculated as a weighted difference between the implied volatility of matched put and call options by the average open interest of the call and put options in each pair. Options for which open interest is non-positive and trading volume is missing are eliminated.

In a backtest, each month, stocks were sorted into quintiles based on volatility spread between put and call options. This method cannot be used in real trading as the trader doesn’t know volatility spread of all stocks at the beginning of the month. However, he/she could compare volatility spread of each stock to stocks which reported last month and decide which quantile would be appropriate.

Option liquidity is considered in a trading strategy. All option pairs written on a particular stock on the day preceding the earnings announcement are divided into three groups based on the average liquidity of the option pair (measured by average bid-ask spread).

Investor goes long stocks with the highest implied volatility spreads on pre-announcement day (volatility spread measured by low bid-ask spread options) and goes short with the lowest implied volatility spreads on pre-announcement day. Each stock is held two days (on an announcement day and one day after). The portfolio is equally weighted and rebalanced daily. The strategy is utilized on 50% to have manageable volatility.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.