Seasonality effect in stocks can be exploited further than just picking individual stocks based on their past same-calendar month returns. The seasonality pattern is also evident in various anomalies, as recent research suggests. Over the 1963-2011 sample period, the long-short strategy, which longs anomaly portfolios with the highest historical same-calendar month returns and shorts the ones with the lowest, earned an average monthly return of 1.38% per month (geometrically annualized to 17.88% per annum), which was considerably higher than that of picking individual stocks (13% per annum). There were 15 anomaly portfolios in total, sorted by size, value, momentum, gross profitability, dividend to price, earnings to price, investment to assets, return on assets, asset growth, net operating assets, accruals, composite equity issuance, net issuances, Ohlson’s O-score, and distress.

Fundamental reason
The academic paper states that none of the factors alone is responsible for seasonal patterns. Individual stocks aggregate seasonalities across the factors. An example is seasonality in stock returns as a function of firm size. Small stocks tend to outperform large stocks in January, so firms’ historical January returns are noisy signals of their sizes. A sort of stocks into portfolios by their past January returns thus predicts variation in future January returns because it correlates with firm size. The same intuition applies if the seasonalities originate from many factors. A sort on past returns picks up all seasonalities no matter what their origins. A regression of returns on past same-calendar-month returns is equivalent to a regression of returns on a noisy combination of attributes associated with return seasonalities.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed at NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ, with monthly return data available at CRSP Database. Accounting data (such as firms’ book values) are obtained from Compustat.
The investor takes the long position on three best-performing and short on three worst-performing anomaly portfolios. According to the same-calendar month returns of the portfolios (their formation is outlined in the description of Table 4, page 43) over the period of the last 20 years. Stocks in the portfolios are value-weighted, the portfolio is to be rebalanced monthly and held for one month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.