Impacting the stock price development via insider information trading is illegal at many levels. However, in some cases, stakeholders can predict the future stock valuation and take informed positions in advance. Retail investors, on the other hand, tend to believe that insiders dispose of private frim information. Therefore, following their steps should generate abnormal returns and help them with assessing the price discovery process. Supported by previous financial research, the paper scrutinized the interaction between insider and retail investment fields and explained how their cooperation influences the stock price development. It showed that outsider traders strategically pursue insider opportunistic long positions while consciously filtering the routine purchases. The opportunistic trades directly display private firm information. The phenomenon is not biased by investor attention, analysts’ forecasts, or earnings announcements, and the evidence is substantial for long rather than short positions. In terms of the effect’s duration, the authors proved that the retailers continue buying the underlying stock in the next year following the insider trading window. Additionally, as liquidity provisions are not a core motivation of such insider-following purchases, the outsiders indirectly assist with translating the private opportunistic information into stock pricing.

Fundamental reason
The fundamental reason for this phenomenon’s functionality lay in the outsiders’ expectations. The retail investors identify private information via insider trades while effectively separating routine purchases. Subsequently, they follow those trades in furtherance for obtaining abnormal returns, which they expect for reacting to, in their understanding, private firm news. Several days following the insider trade window, the stock demand increases, pushing the price upwards and generating future earnings. As stock prices absorb such info, the price discovery is accelerated, approaching the firm’s intrinsic value. The authors ran several robustness checks, including the Granger-type causality test or sub-sample tests, that showed that the results were valid.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. Stocks with a price of less than 1 dollar are excluded. Firstly, the methodology of Boehmer et al. (2020) was applied in the research to derive the retail trades data and analyze the retail order flow occurring around the insider trading dates. With the use of the TAQ dataset, directional trades are found for each stock on each day. Subsequently, calculate retail order imbalance concerning volume and number of trades. To assess the retail investor’s directional trades (the order imbalance in terms of trading volume), calculate both the difference and the sum of the number of shares of a particular stock bought by retail investors on each day and the number of shares of a particular stock sold by retail investors on each day. Then, take the ratio of the difference and the sum calculated in the previous step. Finally, divide the investment universe into two sub-samples: the “Follow” one, including stocks with positive retail order imbalance (the calculated ratio) during the event week (we consider opportunistic trades only), and the “Not-Follow” one consisting of stocks with a negative ratio. The event week is defined as the time frame from the insider purchase date to one day following the SEC reporting date. The Thomson Reuters Insiders dataset was used to derive the insider trades data. Go long on the “Follow” sub-sample stocks and go short on the “Not-Follow” sub-sample stocks. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include any information regarding to this topic.