This novel research combines various branches of financial literature. Firstly, an approach of traditional stock-picking anomalies that includes various technical and fundamental factors that are well-examined in the academic literature. Secondly, a novel and popular approach to some machine learning algorithm. This paper uses a set of stocks from top and bottom pre-selected quantiles according to the volatility scaled returns. Nextly, these stocks with various both fundamental and technical features are used to train a nonlinear support vector machine model to learn the correlations between features, and the profitability of stocks. Although this paper uses a support vector machine model, it is important to bear in mind that oftentimes, the choice of the algorithm is not the most important feature of the strategy, but rather the correct and appropriate choice of the training data.
Moreover, the analysis is made for each individual sector individually, since each sector could be impacted differently by various fundamental factors. We centre our attention to the Industry sector, but the paper also includes other sectors. The choice is simple; the industry sector is the most profitable, which results in an economically significant strategy that is even connected with low volatility. Additionally, the paper examines also just fundamentals or just technical factors or a complex strategy that consists of all sectors in the study. However, the usage of joint features of fundamentals and technicals naturally outperforms the usage of only one set of factors.

Fundamental reason
The main fundamental reason lies partially in the academic research that has identified various technical and fundamental factors, and partially in the classifier that is able to find correlations of the aforementioned or other mostly accounting factors with the performance of the stocks in the future. Therefore, the main fundamental reason can be probably found individually in each paper that has examined technical and fundamental factors such as momentum, accruals and etc. Additionally, according to the paper, the usage of the reduced data set used to train the classiﬁer can improve the resulting performance of the whole strategy because equities with mid-ranking volatility adjusted returns have a tendency of following the trend of the market or to be idiosyncratic. This causes that there are not any strong correlations to be found in such equities. A useful consequence of such approach is that the classiﬁer can be trained faster, which reduces the computational time. Last but not least, although that the trading costs are not included, the economic significance and long holding periods ensure that the costs are not high, and strategy can be successful even in the presence of trading costs.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of industrials sector deﬁned by the Global Industry Classiﬁcation Standard. Firstly, a brief explanation of what an SVM classiﬁer is can be found on page 46, and a possible way of selection of the meta parameters is on page 52. Moving into training of the algorithm, the data are firstly filtered by a proxy for liquidity, dollar trading volume and the stock price. The daily returns are regressed on the prices and volume according to the equation on page 48 to obtain filters. The cutoffs of the ﬁlters are the bottom 50% for dollar trading volume and price, and the top 50% the liquidity ﬁlter. Stocks are filtered to ensure that the model is not trained on the stocks that would be difficult to trade. Nextly, compute volatility adjusted returns where an estimate of the volatility is an exponential moving average (equations on page 49, the paper uses the return from day t-1 to t and parameter of moving average is 2/(180+1) ). Stocks are sorted according to the volatility scaled returns, and only the top and bottom quintiles are used for training (paper includes an analysis of various cut points, the quintiles are one of many representative candidates). Each stock is characterized by a vector of features (both technical and fundamental lists are in table 2 and 3). The vector of features for each stock is used to train the SVM classifier, where the fresh model is trained every time a new portfolio is to be formed. This ensures that it will adapt to changing market conditions and environment. The ten stocks with the highest values are chosen as long positions, and ten stocks with lowest values are chosen as short positions. Stocks are held for 91 days, but every 28 days a new decision is made, and another 20 stocks are added into a portfolio (and held for 91 days). Portfolios are equally-weighted. Lastly, although the strategy is trained on the particular quantiles, the strategy can trade any stock that has passed the filters.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.