Humans like to categorize things as it simplifies thinking because our memory is limited. People use categories in which similar objects can be stored, and then we tend to consider them as similar when making decisions. The most well-known financial categorization used for stocks is industry classification. However, academic research shows that such classifications provide only a noisy and sometimes misleading description of what firms actually do. Research postulates that investors rely strongly on industrial categorization neglect some public information. By using the simple heuristics that a firm is “like its SIC industry”, such investors make predictable valuation mistakes (they cause firms to over-react to their official industry shocks). When such an overreaction happens, firms subsequently revert toward their fundamental value. This categorization bias could be profitably exploited by arbitrageurs betting against these short term overreaction moves.

Fundamental reason
Academic research shows that at high frequencies (e.g. weekly) firms co-move strongly with their official industry and weakly with their fundamental peers, while the opposite pattern holds at lower frequencies. This sharp reversal is in line with the hypothesis that bounded rationality leads some agents to overcompensate for official industry shocks in the short-term and that such mistakes are corrected over time.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ.

A firm’s official industry return is defined as the equally weighted return of all its peers based on official categorization (SIC classification). A firm’s fundamental industry return is defined as the equally weighted return of a portfolio consisting of all its fundamental peers identified by the Hoberg and Phillips methodology. The Hoberg and Phillips (HP) industry classification is constructed by parsing product descriptions from 10K forms and forming word vectors for each firm to compute continuous measures of product similarity for every possible pair of firms. HP classification can be found at https://hobergphillips.tuck.dartmouth.edu/.

At the beginning of each week, stocks are sorted into five quintiles according to the difference between the stock’s official and fundamental industry return during the previous week. Stocks in the Q1 portfolio have experienced the most negative difference between official and fundamental industry returns and stocks in the Q5 portfolio have experienced the most positive difference. The investor invests in a Q1-Q5 portfolio that is long in stocks for which the return difference between the official and the fundamental industry portfolios has been the most negative (Q1, the bottom 20%) and short in stocks for which the return differential has been the most positive (Q5, top 20%). The portfolio is equally weighted and is rebalanced on a weekly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.