Once a momentum trader sees acceleration in a stock’s price, earnings or revenues, the trader will often take a long or short position in the stock in the hope that its momentum will continue in either an upward or downward direction in the future. This strategy relies on short-term movements in a stock’s price rather than fundamental value. Prior literature shows that trading strategies that exploit the price momentum phenomenon generate significant profits worldwide, but the effect in the Chinese market is not that straightforward.
There are two stock exchanges in China, the Shanghai Exchange, and the Shenzhen Exchange. Both allow the trading of two types of shares, A and B shares. Shares issued by the same company, the shareholders’ rights as cash flow and voting rights are the same, but the A-shares are denominated in and require the local currency, while the B shares are denominated in and require an international currency (shares traded on the Shanghai Exchange are denominated in U.S. dollars and the shares on the Shenzhen Exchange in Hong Kong dollars). Up until recently, holders of A-shares were all domestic Chinese investors – currently, about 90% of them are retail investors, who tend to be relatively unsophisticated. In contrast, around 12% of the B share retail investors are domiciled in Hong Kong and other parts of the world. The fact that these individuals are investing in a foreign market suggests that they are likely to be somewhat more sophisticated than the typical A share investor. There are also domestic Chinese B shareholders. However, the domestic shareholders must have access to foreign currency, which suggests that they are also somewhat more sophisticated than the typical A shareholder.
The most striking finding in the paper is that, for those firms issuing both A and B shares, momentum is only present in B shares and not in A-shares. In contrast, A shares exhibit significant short-term return reversal while their B share counterparts do not. Furthermore, the momentum in the B shares arises because overconfident but otherwise sophisticated institutions that trade the shares tend to be overly sceptical about the quality of their counterparty’s information, causing prices to underreact to information. Consistent with this hypothesis, the momentum is stronger for B shares with greater institutional ownership.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the momentum effect refers to the phenomenon that stocks performing best in the recent past tend to perform well in the future. There are both risk-rased and behavioral explanations for this phenomenon. The risk-based explanations are built on the idea that those stocks performing the best in recent months are some sense riskier than their counterparts performing the worst. The behavioral explanations are built on the cognitive biases of investors. More specifically, studies have shown that the momentum effect is caused by overconfidence and self-attribution biases. Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998) assert that the momentum effect is caused by overconfidence and self-attribution biases because these biases induce investors to overreact to information and underreact to disconfirming information. Luo, Subrahmanyam, and Titman (2020) argue that overconfident investors are sceptical about the quality of information that they do not personally produce, which generates underreaction and leads to momentum.
Up until recently, holders of A-shares were all domestic Chinese investors – currently, about 90% of them are retail investors, who tend to be relatively unsophisticated. In contrast, around 12% of the B share retail investors are domiciled in Hong Kong and other parts of the world. The fact that these individuals are investing in a foreign market suggests that they are likely to be somewhat more sophisticated than the typical A share investor. There are also domestic Chinese B shareholders. However, the domestic shareholders must have access to foreign currency, which suggests that they are also somewhat more sophisticated than the typical A shareholder. Also, more foreign institutional investors invest in the B share market than in the A-share market. Moreover, it indicates that the proportion of sophisticated investors in the B share market is higher than that in the A-share market.
Consequently, the sophisticated but biased investors, who are believed to be more active in the B market, generate momentum in the model. A combination of less sophisticated investors, who trade on noise, and constraints on liquidity provision, which with high probability characterize the A market, are more likely to generate reversals rather than momentum. Momentum in the model arises because the more sophisticated investors tend to underestimate the precision of competing information sources. This scepticism, which is a form of overconfidence, leads them to underreact to the information, which generates momentum. In particular, the momentum effect is the strongest for those B shares with the highest level of institutional ownership. This evidence is consistent with the theory that suggests that informed but overconfident investors cause momentum via underreaction to information.
To sum up, the clienteles for A and B shares are very different. The A-share market has considerable retail participation with sharply higher turnover, while a sizeable portion of ownership in B share markets is by foreign institutions. To reiterate, these clienteles arise primarily because there are ownership quotas for foreign institutions in A firms, which form a barrier for these institutions in A firms, and currency conversion restrictions in B firms, which form a barrier for retail investors in B firms. Based on the theoretical analysis, this would imply stronger reversals in A markets and stronger momentum in B markets.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese stocks with common shares from the CSMAR database. All currency values are measured in the U.S. dollar. Stocks below the fifth percentile of the market capitalization of tradable shares are excluded. The momentum effect is utilized by constructing overlapping portfolios using the method of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). Specifically, constructing portfolios based on the returns of the stocks for the past six months and holding these portfolios for six months. At the end of each month, stocks are allocated into three portfolios, low (bottom one-third) to high (top one-third) based on their past six-month returns in each market. To minimize bid-ask bounce and thin trading effects, skip a month between the ranking period when measuring the past returns and the holding period. A momentum portfolio consists of taking a long position in the winner portfolio and a short position in the loser portfolio. These portfolios are value-weighted and are held for six months. Since portfolios are formed each month based on returns in a prior six-month period and held for six months, the investor essentially holds six different portfolios each month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It is a long-short equity strategy.