The negative relation between the firms’ capital investments and the expected stock returns is a widely documented phenomenon in the academic literature called the investment anomaly. Titman et al. (2004) suggest that the link between investment decisions and the expected stock returns may be driven by agency conflicts. This paper builds on their theory and proposes a novel approach to capture firms’ abnormal investments. Instead of measuring an increase in capital investments, the authors focus on spikes in capital expenditures taking place during the fourth quarter of a firm’s fiscal year (qspikes) as it may indicate the presence of agency conflicts. Similarly to the investment factor of Fama and French (2015), they find that the firms with higher (lower) qspikes exhibit lower (higher) subsequent returns as the excess returns monotonically decrease in portfolios with higher qspikes. In particular, the proposed zero-investment portfolio going long the low qspike firms and shorting the high qspike firms delivers an average excess return of 0.32% per month. Surprisingly, the comparison of the portfolios sorted on qspikes and investment growth shows only a small overlap in the portfolio composition, even though the sorting variables have so many features in common. Accordingly, buying the low qspike firms and selling the high qspike firms forms a profitable trading strategy distinct from investment growth.

Fundamental reason
The manager acting as the agent for the shareholders is supposed to make the decisions to maximize the shareholder value even though it is in his best interest to maximize his own wealth. To keep agency conflicts under control, the shareholders restrict the capital budget for investment managers in a given budgeting cycle. As a result, in fear of being allocated reduced amounts over the next budgeting cycle, managers tend to max out on their investment allowance instead of returning capital not strictly required. Such a rushed investment activity becomes more likely towards the end of a fiscal year, casting doubt on its quality. If managers invest beyond the efficient point, the market will eventually reflect the destroyed firm’s value in a lower stock price. Hence, high fourth-quarter investment spikes may indicate a presence of agency conflicts. Furthermore, firms with large cash flows, low long-term debt, and low dividends exhibit larger fourth-quarter investment spikes as they are more likely to reinvest cash flows excessively into their business.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of US-listed common shares in the CRSP database with share codes 10 and 11. Firstly, exclude firms that have less than 10$ million of assets, negative values for quarterly capital expenditures, annual capital expenditures below $100,000, and the sum of all quarterly expenditures exceeding 110% of the value declared in annual data. For each firm, calculate the Q4-spike in capital expenditures (qspike) as a ratio between the firm’s latest capital expenditures in Q4 divided by the average of the firm’s capital expenditures during the three prior quarters. At the end of each month t, sort the investment universe into three portfolios based on the 30th and the 70th percentile of firms’ qspike values in month t-6 (Low, Middle, High). Buy the “Low” portfolio (firms with the lowest qspike values) and sell the “High” portfolio (firms with the highest qspike values). The resulting hedge portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Probably not - Although the strategy is not connected with major drawdowns, it still declines during widely-recognized crises (Figure 3).