In recent years, the finance literature has widely studied the anomalies connected with lottery stocks. Studies have found out that stocks with lottery-like payoffs have negative abnormal returns if they are compared to the stocks with non-lottery-like payoffs. Individual investors prefer stocks with lottery-like payoffs in the search for the as high profits as it is possible. Aforementioned leads to the overpriced “lottery” stocks. Another well-researched anomaly is about the 52-week high of the stock price. Investors are not only concerned about this number; moreover, the 52-week high affects the investor’s behaviour, where the 52-week high is an upper bound for prices or a psychological barrier. Novel research shows that lottery-related anomalies are primarily strong among stocks that are far from 52-week highs, and therefore these two anomalies are connected. Results of the study suggest that the 52-week high price affects the lottery preferences of investors. Naturally, this leads to a trading strategy, where the stocks would be sorted by their nearness to the 52-week high and some lottery measure. The paper has used the maximum daily returns over the previous month, but there are also other possibilities (alternative methods can be found in the paper). The simple and profitable strategy finds the stocks which are far from the 52-week high and shorts the top lottery stocks quintile while taking a long position in the bottom lottery stocks quintile.

Fundamental reason
Past research has found that investors could prefer stocks with positive skewness because they overweight the right tail of probability (the probability of extreme positive returns). Thus, stocks with lottery features are overpriced and have negative abnormal returns. Additionally, the 52-week high serves as a psychological barrier. Investors consider this an upper bound for the prices of stocks. Consider a stock which price is near its 52-week high; the investor expects that this stock price would not exceed its 52-week high and see it as a psychological barrier. Therefore, investors do not overweight the right tail probability of the stock, because they do not expect that there is any right tail above its 52-week high at all. Investors would not buy lottery stocks near the 52-week highs, and these stocks would not be preferable anymore. Aforementioned leads to the absence of lottery-related anomalies among stocks near the 52-week highs.
On the other hand, a stock which is far from its 52-week high, investors anchor on the 52-week high and thinks that there is a room for the price to the run-up. Lottery-related anomalies among these stocks are strong because investors tend to overestimate the probability of the extreme positive returns, and they would prefer stocks with lottery features among stocks far from 52-week highs. Moreover, the relationship between the nearness to the 52-week high and the lottery measures is stronger among stocks with lower institutional ownership than stocks with high institutional ownership, since individual investors are more prone to behavioural biases than institutional investors. Last but not least, the results show that that strategy is not driven just by illiquid stocks, small stocks, or low-priced stocks and results are also robust for liquid stocks, large stocks, and high-priced stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks listed on the NYSE, AMEX or NASDAQ with share code 10 or 11, stocks with prices below $5 at the end of each month are excluded.

Firstly, divide the stocks into the three size groups, where the biggest size group represents the top 30%, the mid group 40% and the group of smallest stocks includes the bottom 30%. Only the biggest size group is used, and stocks are double-sorted by nearness to the 52-week high (a ratio of the current price to the 52-week high price; NH) and MAX (the maximum daily return within a month). The MAX of firm i at the end of the month t is equal to the max of R(i,d), where i denotes the stock and d is from the set of {1,…, D(t)}, where D(t) denotes the number of trading days in the month t. The NH of firm i at the end of the month t is defined as a ratio of the PRC(i,t) and 52HIGH(i,t), where PRC(i,t) denotes the price of the stock i at the end of month t and 52HIGH(i,t) is the highest daily closing price from the beginning of the month t − 11 to the end of the month t. Within a lowest NH quintile, short the top MAX quintile and long the bottom MAX quintile. The strategy is equally weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Skewness preference has a greater impact on asset prices during market downturns than during market booms. This finding is named as “downside gambling effect”. Lottery effect is closely related, and strategy which buys non-lottery stocks and shorts lottery stocks can be therefore used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets.