According to the authors, it is possible to improve already well-researched PEAD by using linguistic analysis of earnings call transcripts. They try to demonstrate that the combination of both Meursault, Vitaly and Liang, Pierre Jinghong and Routledge, Bryan R. and Scanlon, Madeline (2021) approaches and use of alternative data set from company BRAIN called Brain Language Metrics on Earnings Calls Transcripts (BLMECT) is found to yield best results along with fine-tuning of used variables of sorting of data into various different statistical samples, calculation of sentiment surprise by taking various quarterly periods into account and holding periods of stocks in the portfolio.

Fundamental reason
Traditional data sources, such as company filings, broker forecasts, and management guidance, are considered a standard financial analysis approach. Alternative data are defined as non-traditional because they can indicate a company’s future performance outside of traditional sources. One of the recent beneficial additions to the research of PEAD is the use of natural language processing (NLP). Natural language processing (NLP) is a branch of linguistics, computer science, and artificial intelligence concerned with interactions between computers and human language, mainly how to program computers to process and analyze large amounts of natural language data. In our strategy, they are earnings transcripts. The main aim strives to give computers the ability to understand the text and spoken words in much the same way human beings can which helps to provide the basis and additional evidence for investors’ underreaction to earnings announcements since earnings calls contain a wide range of information regarding the firm’s performance, which goes far beyond the headline number.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe used in our strategy is composed of the 500 most liquid stocks with a price at a minimum of 5$, which have earnings call sentiment data available. Sentiment surprise is then calculated as the difference between the most recent Sentiment and mean Sentiment measured during the previous 12 quarters from the Management Discussion section and can be either positive or negative. The value is then used to build ranking rules in the inclusion of stocks in the long-short portfolio. Earnings call sentiment data are modeled to be known one week after the Earnings Calls Transcripts date for each stock. The portfolio is formed weekly with a 4-week holding period (so 1/4 of the portfolio is rebalanced every week).
The ranking is based on the Sentiment surprise variable. Investor goes long the first tercile (stocks with the highest Sentiment positive surprise) and shorts the last tercile. The portfolio is equally-weighted (uniform for each tercile). To account for transaction costs, we use our standard custom fee model, which takes a total of 0.005% from each order.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -