The unemployment rate is one of the key macroeconomic indicators. A low unemployment rate signals that the economy is doing well, while, on the other hand, a high unemployment rate may indicate an unhealthy economy. Yet, is the realized unemployment rate efficient in the cross-sectional pricing of stocks?
Merton (1973) introduced the ICAPM model, which considers that investors intentionally create dynamic portfolios to hedge against time-varying investment and consumption sets. Besides, Merton states that wage income is an essential factor missing in the ICAPM model. This is because investors care not only about future returns but also consider human capital. However, expected returns to human capital are difficult to determine. Therefore, this paper tests the importance of the unemployment rate in the cross-sectional pricing of individual stocks. The author (Ince) observed that realized unemployment fails in predicting future returns, while forecasted unemployment is significantly priced in the cross-section of stock returns.
Naturally, such a result can be a base of the trading strategy. The author tells us to calculate each stock’s unemployment beta (exposure to a four-quarter change in unemployment expectations) and, subsequently, create decile portfolios, longing the decile with the lowest unemployment beta and shorting the decile with the highest unemployment beta.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is that forecasted unemployment significantly predicts industrial production growth. It is negatively correlated with GDP growth and industrial production growth and, in this way, influences investment opportunities. Secondly, an increase in the forecasted unemployment signals that many people will lose their jobs. According to the author (Ince), this would decrease expected returns to the aggregate human capital (expected labor income growth), making investors hold hedge portfolios to protect themselves against innovations in return for their human capital. Last but not least, the unemployment premium is higher during bad states of the economy, high implied volatility, and high economic uncertainty.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks traded on AMEX, NYSE, and NASDAQ. Stocks below the 20th NYSE market capitalization percentile are excluded. The data come from CRPS and Compustat databases. The unemployment rate forecasts come from the Economic Data of Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Firstly, each month t, estimate the unemployment beta for each stock. Run the following 60-month fixed window rolling regression for each stock: R_t = α_t + β_(FUNEMP)*∆FUNEMP_t + β_(MKT)*MKT_t + ε_t (equation (1) page 9), where R_t is the excess return of the stock in month t, ∆FUNEMP_t is a four-quarter change in the cross-sectional mean of the one-quarter-ahead unemployment rate (calculated by professional forecasters), MKT_t represents the excess market return, and ε_t is the residual. Estimated coefficient β_(FUNEMP) represents the unemployment beta – exposure to a four-quarter change in unemployment expectations of the stock.
Secondly, sort stocks into deciles based on the previous month’s unemployment beta. Finally, long the decile with the lowest unemployment beta and short the decile with the highest unemployment beta. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Investors are willing to hold dynamic portfolios to hedge themselves against increases (decreases) in forecasted unemployment (labor income growth). The paper presents several strategies with active hedge portfolios to protect themselves against increases in expected unemployment.