An option contract provides the option holder with the opportunity to buy (or sell) the underlying asset. Due to the unique payoff structure of option contracts profit from trading options can be very different than the profit from trading the underlying stock. Because of the limited downside risk of call options, a speculator could buy call options on multiple stocks and profit even if on average the stock price goes down, as long as one or two of the stocks have high returns. Smart money can be defined as cash invested by those “in-the-know”, and given the features of options, options are largely popular among smart investors.
In the context of this article, smart money also refers to “Unusual Option Activity” reported daily by CNBC. “Unusual Option Activity” are abnormally large option trades that you would not expect to see under normal market conditions. These trades are highly levered, one-directional bets considered to be “smart money” because they are likely to be driven by informed traders. But is it really smart to follow CNBC’s reports? Do they recognize the right “smart” and “unusual” stocks? It turns out that CNBC’s picking process of Unusual Option Activity is one-dimensional and insufficient in terms of recognizing the real unusual activity. Even though some investors earned abnormal returns in the past by following their reports, the article proves that the stock price is, indeed, in the short run blown up by retail traders following CNBC but in the long run, this strategy generates a negative abnormal future return. The research paper shows that option volume itself is not what provides information, but the unusualness of the volume. Moreover, the paper presents a successful way of identifying Unusual Option Activity, which can be the base of a trading strategy that identify smart trades (money). Furthermore, research proves that informed trading in options markets has an immediate impact on the stock price and therefore helps in price discovery. However, ATM and ITM options have higher degrees of price discovery, while stock prices are slower to react to deep OTM options.

Fundamental reason
The key to smart investing is to not blindly follow some reports about investors “in-the-know” without knowing the evaluating criteria. The research paper does a good job at explaining why stocks presented on CNBC’s Unusual Option Activity should not be considered smart money. With the use of the Market Model with a 20 trading day estimation period and a two trading day gap period, the authors calculate the total period CAR and the post-event CAR. They show that the abnormal returns on the day of coverage are higher for short term calls compared to long term calls. However, the post-event CAR is negative for both subsamples and much more negative for the long term call. These results make economic sense as you would expect there to be more information in the short term option trades.
The newly presented way of identifying Unusual Option Activity takes into account Total Option Volume, Total Open Interest, as well as Total Change in Open Interest, compared to the 20 day moving average and standard deviation of Total Option Volume and Total Change in Open Interest with a 7 day gap period. The exact criteria can be found on page 16 in the research paper. What is more important, such criteria can successfully identify unusual trading activity, that the literature connects with “smart money”, and subsequently leads to a profitable strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks with options in OptionMetrics database, contracts with more than 90 days to maturity are excluded. Firstly, identify “Unusual Option Activity” using the guide on page 16 in the research paper (identification of Unusual Option Activity takes into account Volume, Total Option Volume, Total Open Interest as well as Total Change in Open Interest in a comparison).

A significant price impact caused by a large volume of options trades can be expected on the day of the trade; however, these tend to be an under-reaction as the abnormal returns continue to grow in a slower pace in the following weeks.

The strategy consists of following informed investors, and the portfolio should be updated daily as every day there could be new, unusual option activity. After the identification, go long on all stocks with option activity recognized as “unusual activity”.

The portfolio is equally-weighted and held for 50 days.

Furthermore, in our opinion, sell all stocks for which the option’s activity is reported on CNBC’s as unusual because they tend to have a subsequent negative return.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide any information about the usage of the strategy as a hedge.