With the rise in popularity of ESG investing, it shouldn’t be surprising that a firm’s environmental standards could influence its future price. The E in ESG stands for Environment, and it encompasses various variables, such as the firm’s climate policy, energy use, creation and handling of toxic waste, and CO2 emissions. Many different aggregate indexes attempt to capture the environment-related properties into a single score, however, often with various (and even between themselves disagreeing) results. In this paper, William O. Brown et al. investigate whether there might be a better way of combining the many granular variables to gain a reliable prediction of the stock’s future price based on the E variables.

It would be a near-impossible task to manually choose the correct variables with predictive abilities- not only is there an incredible number of them, they are also often highly correlated. The authors solve this problem by utilizing machine learning methods. They construct a models using Random Forest, Gradient Boosted Regression Trees, and Robust Elastic Net methods, all of which, when compared, outperform the OLS (Ordinary Least Squares) method. That is because the OLS method is not suited to represent non-linear data, while the machine learning methods are. This is supported by the finding that such a difference is not found when training the model on the typical firm characteristics (size, momentum, and others). Moreover, they find that the scope 3 emission data are important in the prediction (as compared to scope 1 and scope 2). Scope 3 data are the broadest category, covering all of the emissions emitted by the firm’s activity. The authors also propose that the strategy performs better when the climate concerns in the media are more intense. Otherwise, the strategy is quite simple once the machine learning model is constructed. The authors use the model to predict future stock prices based on the E variables in a decile portfolio, then long the highest decile and short the lowest.

Fundamental reason
The main advantage of this strategy, as already mentioned in the description, lies in the different computational approach the authors chose. By using machine learning to predict the future price of a firm’s stock, it is possible to significantly improve the method’s capability to predict a firm’s environmental standing’s influence on its future price. To put it another way, machine learning captures some combined feature of granular environmental variables that usually gets lost when constructing an aggregate score. Using the raw individual variables evades this problem and significantly improves the predictions.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks with required data (environmental indicators related to emissions, resource use, and innovation – such as Total Water Withdrawal, Electricity purchased, Total Energy used, Waste Recycling Ration, CO2 E.E. Indirect – S3; all indicators that were left after data cleaning in the research are listed in Table 1 of the paper) available on Refinitiv. Microcap stocks and stocks with a price of less than $5 are excluded. Furthermore, all firm-year observations ought to have non-missing total CO2 emissions. Then, only variables that have at least 60% coverage of firm-year observations are included. If for a firm-year observation, over 20% of the remaining variables are still lacking value, the firm-year observation is omitted.

If there are still some observations with missing values, they are supplemented as follows: For dummy variables, values are set to 0. For continuous variables, the industry median is used (in case of an unavailable industry median, the median of all firms in that year is used instead).

The data are processed using a machine learning method called Random Forest to predict the monthly returns. In the research, the authors used the dataset of monthly observations to train a model on 3 years worth of data (2007-2009), and the data from the year 2010 (so from 1 year) were used as a validation sample. (The years 2011-2020 were tested out-of-sample and provided the presented results.)

At the beginning of each month, form decile portfolios based on the predicted returns. Long the portfolio with the highest expected return, short the lowest. The strategy is value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The theory of Pastor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2021) shows that green firms earn lower expected returns in equilibrium than brown firms because investors enjoy holding green stocks, and green stocks hedge climate risk. However, no note is about general market downturns.