A lot of companies like to undergo stock splits in case their stock prices are too expensive or too cheap. It is seemingly a cosmetic transaction as only price per share and shares outstanding change, and no financing or investment decisions are involved that affect cash flows. However, academic research shows that this event may contain useful information for traders and investors. Research shows that the post-split return drift is economically and statistically significant, and most of the positive abnormal returns concentrate in the first two to three post-announcement months. The results also show that the post-split drift is related to earnings surprises in the quarter following stock splits, confirming that abnormal returns following splits reflect information about future earnings. It is possible to employ market neutral trading strategy to exploit post-split drift on its own or combine this anomaly with PEAD drift to enhance investment returns even more.

Fundamental reason
Academic research states that stock splits convey information on improvement in future earnings. Analysts’ earnings forecasts are low at the time of split announcements and forecast revisions are sluggish over time. These results are consistent with the notion that investors (including analysts) underreact to future earnings of split firms. Post-split drift effect could be profitably combined with PEAD anomaly to increase trading returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe in research paper consists of all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ firms.

Each day, investor checks which companies have earnings announcements and checks whether SUE (unexpected standardized earnings – defined as the earnings surprise based on analysts’ forecasts and actual earnings,) of each company is within the top or bottom quintile of SUEs over last three months. Investor goes long stock (which underwent stocks split in the last three months) on 3rd day after earnings announcement in case company’s SUE was in the top quintile. Investor goes short stock (which did not split stocks in the last three months) on 3rd day after earnings announcement in case company’s SUE was in the bottom quintile. Stocks are weighted equally, and each stock is held for three months.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.