Explaining equity options returns has not been researched as extensively as the underlying instruments’ cross-section. This paper describes a strategy that tries to fill this gap in the literature by leveraging the amounts of data hidden in the options markets using machine learning methods. By forming ensemble forecasts, future option returns are predicted using option level and stock level features. A large information dataset is used to model the expected return based on the most explanatory variables from the literature. The dataset is quite extensive, with 11 feature groups including informed trading, market frictions, and liquidity explanatory variables as described in Appendix IA4. In this way, the authors can address some of the critiques that are often associated with the modeling of expected returns in that the sample size is much larger than with modeling stock level moments. Options are a very lively market – especially in the last couple of years – and although they are used in speculative as well as hedging practice, there is little research that would point to the explanation of the variance risk premium, especially in the branch of prediction. In practice, it takes a skilled trader to analyze the options markets and, for example, bet on the skewness of the implied volatility curve against the tenor. The authors try to detect such opportunities through the model and effectively detect the mispricing or arbitrage opportunities. This approach is relatively novel in the literature, and despite some of the potential difficulties as also addressed by the paper, it can be handy for a trader or a portfolio manager to quickly detect over or undervalued pockets of the options markets.

Fundamental reason
The authors’ work on the explainability of the models is conducted through a Shapley Additive Explanations framework that uncovers the feature group importance in the nonlinear forecast ensemble. The most important characteristic is the position of the option on the implied volatility surface relative to the market, which can be perceived as a relative value factor. Volatility and liquidity risk premia come second, followed by the usual suspects in price explanatory variables such as momentum, quality, and informed trading. These factors are hard to explain as they are constructed as mispricing signals modeled using a complex set of predictors that learn the nonlinear structure of the information set.

Simple trading strategy
The universe consists of all U.S optionable equities with share codes 10 and 11 from NYSE, AMEX or NASDAQ. Options data is collected from the IvyDB database together with the implied vol. surface. The sample spanning the period from January 1996 through December 2020 contains the historical prices and fundamental data for the underlying stocks, and these are obtained from CRSP and Compustat. Options without greeks and implied vol. are purged as well as stocks that have a dividend scheduled during the investment period. Several other processing steps common to the literature can be found on page 13. The target variable is the excess return of a long option that is delta-hedged daily at the close. A rich information set consisting of various feature groups is constructed with features such as liquidity, value, and others that can be found in Appendix IA3. These predictors are used to train the 5 nonlinear models, namely the Random Forest, Gradient Boosted Trees, GBT with dropout, and Feed-Forward Nets. A Simple Ensemble is constructed, where each prediction is equally weighted. The models are trained using a 5-year training, 2-year validation, and 1-year testing window. This is repeated every year, with the training set expanding each year, shifting the validation and testing windows as well. The validation sample is used for hyperparameter optimization of the models in the ensemble. Portfolios are constructed each month on the predicted sample from January 2001 by sorting expected return forecasts into deciles and taking a long-short portfolio. This effectively buys options in the top bucket and writes options in the low bucket. It is equally weighted among all the positions and fully funded.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Probably yes, based on Table IA8.3. The strategy performs even better during stressful periods such as high VIX, low sentiment or high FED stress.