Nowadays, firms have a wide variety of channels that can be used to disclose information to investors. Channels such as earnings announcements, conference calls, regulatory ﬁlings or broker-hosted investor conferences have in the past received a lot of attention of academics; however, research suggests that firms are starting to use analyst days more and more. An analyst day is an event hosted by the firm where the ﬁrm invites equity analysts and institutional investors in a conference-style gathering with presentations and discussions of key issues such as corporate strategy, ﬁnancial performance and product development. Moreover, per Regulation Fair Disclosure, the full content of these events should be simultaneously disclosed to the general public, which presents a chance to identify these events easily. Clearly, ﬁrms that are willing to pay the costs of holding analyst days are more likely to disclose positive information than negative information. The reason is simple; bad news could be disclosed via less conspicuous means such as press releases. Consistent with this hypothesis, authors have found that post-analyst-day abnormal returns are signiﬁcantly positive. The following month after the analyst day is characterized by the abnormally higher average market-adjusted return. Moreover, the abnormal returns are signiﬁcantly positive in most days during this window. Connecting the aforementioned with the fact that market participants signiﬁcantly underreact to the information conveyed in analyst days leads to a trading strategy consisting of buying the stock connected with the analyst day some days before or right on the Analyst day and holding it after until rebalancement. We have chosen a strategy which buys the stock on the analyst days and holds it 20 days (approximately one month), but various other variants can be found in the source paper.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for functionality is probably the natural interpretation of analyst days events, firms that are willing to pay the costs of such events are likely to disclose positive information because the negative information could be disclosed much cheaper. Therefore this interpretation is intuitive because rationality suggests that firms would prefer to attract the least attention to bad news and maximize the attention to the good news. Moreover, research has found that there is a signiﬁcant degree of market underreaction to analyst days. There is a possibility that market participants, at first sight, do not find all the information revealed by the firms during analyst days as credible and they are only able to reveal its true impact during following days. Another possibility is those analyst days do not receive enough market attention and investors are either not aware of them or do not pay enough attention. Abnormal returns remain elevated for up to 60 trading days after the events. Therefore there are many possibilities for how to utilize this anomaly for a strategy.
Additionally, the paper has not found any evidence of mean reversion. This suggests that investors can simply buy the stocks even after the event and still realize signiﬁcantly positive abnormal returns. Furthermore, there is also evidence that some cash-ﬂow-related metrics, such as sales growth and margins, signiﬁcantly increase after analyst days. While analyst coverage, EPS estimates and price targets all signiﬁcantly increase, forecast dispersion is signiﬁcantly reduced. Aforementioned results also suggest that the information revealed during analyst days is credibly related to ﬁrm’s cash ﬂows.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks, out of the 1804 unique stocks with totally 3890 analyst days exist. The information about analyst days must be publicly released through 8-K forms ﬁled in the SEC’s EDGAR system and/or a press release on the analyst day. After the identification, the strategy is simple: if there is an analyst day connected with some firm, the corresponding stock is bought on the analyst day and held 20 days (approximately one month). The strategy is value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only therefore it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).