Is it better to raise the debt or to issue new shares? According to academic research, companies issuing numerous new shares in a given year will have worse performance than those that don’t issue new shares. The stock issuance effect means that the stock price of the companies issuing new shares will probably decrease, as the same net income will have to be divided into more parts. Moreover, it can be an indicator of overvalued stocks.
This novel research paper is mainly a critique of the Fama and French model, but there is also presented quite an interesting trading strategy. If we identify the large-capitalization firms that issue many new stocks, short them and go long the non-issuers, we get an economically significant spread. The authors focus on large-cap firms because these compromise around 92% of the stock market’s total capitalization, meaning small caps are only around 8% of the total capitalization. As authors note, that would result in overweighting the small-cap firms’ contribution, which also happens in Fama and French models.

Fundamental reason
For companies, issuing new shares makes the most sense when managers feel that the stocks are overvalued. Managers can exploit these highly-priced stocks, especially when they want to take out additional finances from the investors. However, emitting new stocks makes their cashflows, earnings, etc., dilute among the higher number of shares, causing shares’ prices to drop. Moreover, according to the research, these issuers are usually growth stocks, which tend to have low realized returns. The above effect is exploited in a strategy where we short equity issuers and long firms that don’t issue new shares.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks. Only firms with share codes 10 and 11 are included, and all financial institutions (SIC code 6000s) are excluded. Every firm has to have at least two years of returns data on both CRSP and Compustat. Only firms with the non-negative book of equity, non-missing revenue value, and at the same time have at least one of the costs COGS/SG&A/interest expense, are considered. From this sample, only large capitalization firms are chosen, that is, those with a market value of equity greater than the median NYSE firm as of June in a given year.
For equity issuers identification, the change in CRSP split-adjusted shares is used. In this strategy, “issuers” are considered those firms whose increase in outstanding shares in year t-2 relative to year t-1 is at least 5%. Long the non-issuers and short the >5% issuers. Strategy is equally weighted and rebalanced yearly in June.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide any information regarding this topic.