Momentum is one of the oldest and most recognized investment strategies in the financial markets. The simple momentum strategy in the equity market states that stocks that have performed well in the past are inclined to continue to perform well, while on the other hand, stocks that have performed poorly would continue in this trend. However, academics persistently research new investing strategies, finding momentum in different markets or even factors.

Many studies have examined factor momentum, yet the authors (Ma, Liao, Jiang) first investigated this anomaly in China. They employed ten non-momentum factors: size, value, profitability, investment, illiquidity, the earnings-to-price ratio, accruals, the cash flow-to-price ratio, turnover, and betting against beta. Firstly, their findings showed that the time-series momentum strategy is profitable for most of the factors individually. Subsequently, they constructed the cross-sectional factor momentum strategy (CSFM), telling us to buy factors with above-median returns relative to other factors and short those with returns below the median. Last but not least, it is necessary to mention that the authors also constructed a profitable time-series factor momentum strategy (TSFM), which buys factors with positive returns and shorts those with negative returns.

Fundamental reason
Momentum strategies are widely known and accepted among academics, and there is no doubt that they are working. However, the authors (Ma, Liao, Jiang) discovered that the main reason for creating factor returns is mispricing and that the factor momentum comes from mispricing correction and limits to arbitrage. Furthermore, they showed that momentum strengthens during high aggregate idiosyncratic volatility and low investor sentiment periods and is stronger among stocks with high information asymmetry and short-sale constraints. Finally, these findings confirm the hypothesis that increased arbitrageur participation is associated with stronger factor momentum when limits to arbitrage exist.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of A-share stocks listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock markets. The data come from China Stock Market and Accounting Research Database. Stocks with special transfer status are excluded. At first, construct ten non-momentum factor portfolios based on: size, value, profitability, investment, illiquidity, the earnings-to-price ratio, accruals, the cash flow-to-price ratio, turnover, and betting against beta. Then, calculate the annualized factor returns as the difference between the top quintile average returns and the bottom quintile average returns. Finally, go long factors with above-median returns compared to other factors over the previous year and go short those with returns below the median. The strategy is equal-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -