With the fast development of quantitative finance, portfolio sorting methods have become prevalent methods to examine whether some asset characteristic is priced or not. The popularity is not that surprising given that these portfolio sorts are easily understandable since they represent an already tradeable strategy and are non-parametric. However, suppose we want to control for more characteristics. In that case, the portfolio sorting can be connected with several “flaws” such as increasing dimensionality or empty portfolios (if we have too many sorts and not enough assets). The novel research of Fritzsch et al. (2021) overcomes these issues by employing quantile curves of the pre-defined characteristic conditional on a set of controls (additional variables). The authors utilize a non-parametric, machine-learning approach to estimate these curves and show how they can be used to form factor-mimicking portfolios which are able to control for additional variables.
The theory is demonstrated on the Variance Risk Premium (VRP). The past research has identified that the options for stocks with high implied and low realized volatility are overpriced, and options with low implied but high realized volatility are underpriced (in general, the volatility is one of the main determinants of the options price and the high implied volatility is commonly “overshot” and the realized volatility in the future is lower). Based on these findings, the paper examines options sorted based on the implied volatility conditional on the realized volatility (and also moneyness, skewness, and kurtosis as additional results).

Fundamental reason
The traditional sorts based on the deviations of realized and implied volatilities do take not only long or short positions in options with large and low deviations but also take a long position in options with high realized volatility and a short position in low realized volatility. As a result, the strategy might be “unbalanced” with systematic differences in the realized volatility (see Figures 4 or 5). In the quantile curve approach, it is possible to control for the realized volatility and have more “balanced” portfolios. Additionally, it is also possible to control for other variables, such as moneyness. As a result, the approach eliminates any potential biases that could arise from systematic differences in either realized volatility or option moneyness.
Moreover, the authors identify several benefits, such as no assumption of the functional form of the relationship between volatilities (non-parametric approach), alleviating the problem of empty portfolios. Lastly, the strategies are easy to implement once the quantile curves are estimated.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of US equity american options. The data are sourced from CRSP and OptionMetrics IvyDB US database. Only one month from expiration options are included, and the portfolios are formed with information available from the first trading day after monthly options expiration. Exclude observations with ask price lower than the bid price, a bid price equal to zero, bid-ask spread below the minimum tick size, and those that violate the arbitrage bounds (page 12). Only options with moneyness between 0.5 and 1.5 are included.
The strategy requires implied volatility, moneyness, and realized volatility calculated as the standard deviation of the realized daily stock returns with a lookback period of 12 months. As the first step, construct the conditional quantile function of implied volatility conditioned on realized volatility and moneyness by minimizing the check-loss of the residuals (see equation 1). The authors use an ML technique, “leveraging,” to construct the estimator (the authors refer to Meir and Rätsch (2003)). Using the conditional quantile function and form decile portfolios. Long delta-hedged call options from the highest decile and short delta-hedged call options from the lowest decile. Positions are held to maturity. The portfolios are equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The VRP seems to suffer during stressful periods (e.g., https://caia.org/blog/2020/06/25/variance-risk-premium-what-premium).