Generally speaking, the abnormal stock return occurs after positive information regarding an issuing firm or induced by a certain undirect event. By this means, we divide such stock demand shifts into informed and uninformed flows. The paper scrutinizes the effect of dividends playing a role in the stock market growth. Even though a number of authors claim that stockholders usually consume their dividends (Di Maggio, Kermani, and Majlesi (2020), etc.), a significant part of stock inflows are reinvested back to the market. Moreover, not only do such transactions happen very soon after receiving, but they are also very well predictable, as dividend payments are announced well before the payday. As a result, these uninformed albeit predictable cashflows induce better market performance during the dividend payday and the following day. The most intriguing shifts in returns occur within the top 5 to 50 dividend days of the year. Therefore, the findings of the paper can be easily utilized in a market timing strategy that is active only during the top dividend days.

Fundamental reason
Even though the paper claims that there is no direct evidence of reinvesting dividends into the stocks they flow from, a significant part of dividends are not directly consumed, but are rather reinvested into stock market. For example mutual funds oftentimes reinvest dividends. The portfolio managers allocate the dividends into quality assets and the whole process supports the overall market. Therefore, the main reason for the functionality lies in the predictability of upward price pressures caused by dividend paydates and their reinvestments.
Additionally, the hypothetical speculations around the reversal were refuted for the middle-term periods and the results were robust even outside the US, holding for the 58 international markets.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of CRSP ordinary common stocks with codes 10 or 11 listed on the NYSE, NASDAQ or AMEX exchanges. For each day t, compute the dividend payment yield defined as the dividends paid on day t plus dividends paid on day t-1 divided by the average daily dividend payment based on days t-20 through t-272 (approximately one year). If the dividend payment yield ranks in the top of 50 days based on past 252 trading days, long the value-weighted market portfolio. The strategy is rebalanced daily.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It is a long only strategy that buys market portfolio.