Volatility is a major factor in the financial markets, and volatility-based indicators are often used to measure investors’ sentiment. The most known volatility indicator is the CBOE VIX index, and many contrarian market timing systems use it as an input for decisions. However, the VIX value incorporates the volatility forecast based on the historical volatility pattern as well as the volatility expectations of the investors. The GARCH (1,1) model forecast can be considered as a proxy for the volatility that the options traders expect based on the historical behavior of the market. The simple difference between the VIX and GARCH model could, therefore, be a purer sentiment indicator. The academic research paper calls this difference NEVI (Net Emotional Volatility Index) and shows that it could be successfully used as a new market timing indicator.

Fundamental reason
VIX can be decomposed into two parts: rational market volatility and emotional volatility. The emotional volatility derived from VIX by subtracting the GARCH forecast is a purer sentiment indicator than VIX.

Simple trading strategy
Historical S&P 500 index data are used to estimate the coefficients in the GARCH (1,1) model. Once the GARCH coefficients are obtained, for each day, the investor forecasts the volatility for the next 30 days, reiterating the forecast, which means that every forecast becomes the last observation for the next forecast. The average of these values is called the Average GARCH Forecast (AGF). The investor then calculates the Net Emotional Volatility Index (NEVI) as the difference between the VIX and AGF. The historical NEVI index is then sorted into deciles, and the current NEVI is used as a “Momentum” indicator – the investor opens long on a position when the indicator goes below the 2nd decile and short on positions when it goes above the 8th decile. The position is held 30 days from the day of the last long or short signal.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy is the timing equity market, but traders can possibly split this strategy into two halves and use a short-only part of this strategy. After a careful backtest, this short-only strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification during market/economic crises.