Investing in stocks brings many upsides in comparison with other asset classes. Investors, who decide to invest their money in stocks not only capitalise on their investments with the rise in the stock prices but with a majority of stocks, they also receive dividends. Dividends can either be received as cash, or reinvested and transformed into new shares according to the company’s dividend reinvestment plan (DRIP). These shares are often offered at a discount to the market price, which creates opportunities to benefit from.
One of these opportunities, of how to earn an abnormal returns thanks to the companies DRIP, is presented in the study from Tze Chuan’ Chewie’ Ang et al. (2020). The authors of this paper have focused their research mainly on the possibility of arbitrage between the stocks offered at the secondary market and stocks with discount, that are offered to shareholders instead of a cash dividends. This kind of arbitrages can be done thanks to the possibility of arbitragers to borrow the shares from their real owners, before the dividends pay-off. However, realising this kind of arbitrages brings many downsides with additional costs for loaning the shares from their real owners like pension funds or insurance companies. Therefore, the authors have come up with an idea of different trading strategy.
As the arbitragers want to receive as many shares as they can, it is in their interest to push the stock price lower before the dividend pay-off. The presented strategy then proposes shorting stocks of all firms with DRIP discount, whose DRIP pricing period (a crucial period that determines the price of new shares) will start in the following trading day. Simultaneously, an investor opens equal-sized long position via futures or ETFs, that mimics the stock index of the respective country. In the case of this study, the Australian shares and ASX200 index, but the strategy is also applicable to the US equity market. The positions are held for one day, with the short side portfolio of stocks being value-weighted. The presented strategy would bring an average annual return of 27% from 01/2007 to 06/2018.

Fundamental reason
As previously described arbitragers want to make as much profit as possible; they have a motivation to manipulate stock prices downward over the pricing period. As the price of the new shares, that are offered instead of the cash dividend is determined by the volume-weighted average price (VWAP) over the pricing period, DRIP participants will receive more shares with lower VWAP. Moreover, DRIP arbitrageurs’ shorting over the pricing period to lock in their profit may contribute to temporary price pressure. The further findings show that the negative price pressure is more pronounced in stocks with larger DRIP issue size and higher dividend yield.
To sum it up, the functionality is based on the falling prices of stocks connected with DRIPs. Since these falls are predictable, naturally, it can be utilized in a trading strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the companies that are constituents of S&P 500 and ASX200, that offer DRIP discount, and S&P 500 and ASX200 futures or ETF. Every day, the investor identifies all firms with DRIP discount that will be within the DRIP pricing period in the following trading day. Investor creates short positions in a value-weighted portfolio of such shares. Simultaneously, an investor opens equal-sized long position via futures or ETFs on S&P500 and ASX200. The positions are held to the next day.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide any information about the usage of the strategy as a hedge.