Time-series momentum (TSMOM) shows that an asset’s past returns positively predict the asset’s future returns. In a recent study, Pitkäjärvi et al. (2020) proposed a cross-asset time-series momentum strategy (XTSMOM). They used past bond and stock market returns as predictors and found that the XTSMOM performs better than a single-asset TSMOM strategy. This paper uses past crude oil straddle returns jointly with past stock market returns to predict future stock returns. It is the first study to examine the XTSMOM between stock and global energy commodity markets. As an asset’s volatility is not directly tradable in the market, USO straddle returns serve as an indicator of oil implied volatility. Adding the one-month lagged straddle returns increased the adjusted R-squared by 2.93% compared to the single-asset model with one-month lagged stock returns. The results show that the XTSMOM strategy, with positive (negative) past stock returns and negative (positive) past straddle returns, generates substantial positive (negative) future stock market returns and Sharpe ratios. Besides, XTSMOM can predict economic cycles. Specifically, positive (negative) stock and negative (positive) USO straddle returns can point to good (bad) economic times, with higher (lower) industrial production, decreasing (increasing) unemployment rates, and lower (higher) inflation. Accordingly, going long (short) in the stock market when past stock returns are positive (negative) and past USO straddle returns are negative (positive) results in a profitable trading strategy. From a risk-adjusted perspective, the XTSMOM strategy (1.01) nearly triples the Sharpe ratio compared to the traditional TSMOM (0.35).

Fundamental reason
Since the 1850s is crude oil a crucial fuel for the global economy. Consequently, oil price uncertainty adversely affects the global economy and stock markets. The slow movement of capital across markets and the financial constraints of financial intermediaries can explain the connection between the crude oil implied volatility and future stock market returns. Investors tend to overreact within the market directly affected by the shocks, while they underreact in other markets. In this case, arbitrageurs slowly reallocate their capital and generate momentum from oil-implied volatility to the stock markets. Besides, high oil-implied volatility increases market margins making financial intermediaries more capital constrained. As high oil-implied volatility is usually accompanied by high stock market volatility, financial intermediaries face higher market margins and declines in their portfolio value simultaneously. Moreover, traditional factors can’t explain the returns of the XTSMOM. Even after controlling for the SMB and HML factors, one-month lagged straddle returns still have predictive power statistically significant at the 10% level. In addition, the predictive power of the past USO straddle returns is not subsumed by the information of the lagged stock market return. Last but not least, the XTSMOM strategy remains profitable after accounting for the transaction costs.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 59 stock market indexes and a one-month US interest rate. Firstly, construct a zero-beta straddle portfolio using one-month ATM USO options. Each trading day, choose a pair of one-month call and put options with spot prices closest to strike prices. Adjust the weights of the calls and puts to make the options portfolio beta neutral. Then sum up the daily returns for each pair of monthly options to obtain straddle monthly return. Secondly, calculate the monthly return of the local stock market index over the one-month US interest rate to gain a monthly excess return. Take a long (short) position in the local stock market index in a given month if the past monthly local stock market excess return is positive (negative) and the USO past monthly straddle return is negative (positive). Otherwise, hold the one-month US Treasury bills. The portfolio is weighted equally across all countries and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The performance seems to be stable, but the momentum is prone to crashes and turning points.