Momentum and reversal are some of the best-researched anomalies of the financial market. These effects have been found within many market classes, such as stocks, commodities, and currencies. The novel research by Ch. S. Jones, M. Khorram, and H. Mo propose that both the momentum and reversal effects can also be found within the options market, with an interesting finding that the presence is much stronger there. For example, their evidence shows that the Sharpe ratio is up to three times higher compared to the cross-sectional momentum strategy on stocks. Moreover, they offer significant evidence of seasonality and the presence of reversal. Since momentum, seasonality and reversal returns are mostly positively skewed, strategies tend not to have substantial drawdowns. The immense contribution of this paper is the evidence of reversal and momentum not being strongly linked.
The findings of the paper can be utilized in either momentum or reversal strategy based on the straddles and their past returns. This screener’s addition is related to the reversal (the momentum variant can also be found on Quantpedia). The reversal strategy trades zero delta straddles which are sorted into portfolios based on one month lagged returns.

Fundamental reason
To explain their findings, Ch. S. Jones, M. Khorram, and H. Mo examine the relation between delta-hedged option returns and the gains from volatility swaps. Using the methods proposed by Bollerslev et al. to disentangle volatility shocks from risk premia in swaps they find that momentum is mostly driven by underreaction to past shocks. On the other hand, seasonality is the consequence of unpriced seasonal variation in stock realized volatility (does not hold for implied volatility). In the short-term period, the sample displays cross-sectional reversal evidence, meaning that if the stock’s options performed relatively well, it would perform relatively poor in the following month. In particular, for the strategy at lag one, there is significant evidence of a cross-sectional reversal. Since in the strategy, it is proposed that straddles are held to maturity, their returns only depend on the option prices at the end of the previous period, which implies the payoff is explicitly linked to the price of the underlying stock. However, the presence of short-term reversal shows that the option payoff on the expiration date impacts the pricing of the non-expiring options on the same day.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the options traded on the U.S. exchanges for common equity only and expire within the regular monthly cycle and available in the OptionMetrics database. The analysis is performed on the end-of-day bid-ask quotes. Moreover, stock prices, returns, trading volume, market capitalization, and adjustments from stock splits are sourced from CRSP. On the expiration date, two pairs of call and put options with maturity in the following month are picked out for each stock – the first pair is selected based on the positive open interest of both put and call options on the day they are chosen, the second pair is selected by the call delta which is required to be as close as possible to 0,5. After selection, the pairs that record call delta outside the range 0,25 and 0,75 are dropped, ensuring that only at-the-money options are targeted. From the residual pairs’ delta straddles are formed by assigning – a delta of the put option times the bid-ask midpoint of call weight to the call option and + delta of the call times the bid-ask midpoint of put to the put option (weights sum up to 1). Stocks are sorted into the quintile portfolios based on the straddle returns in the one-month formation period. The strategy consists of going long on the quintile with the lowest return and shorting the quintile with the highest return. Portfolios are held until expiration (1 month) – strategy consists of holding the zero delta straddles to maturity.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Probably - Based on the figure A2, the performance seems to be stable also during the well-known bear markets.