Nowadays, 80% of the stock market is held by institutional investors that follow particular investment styles. For example, growth investing, value investing, long/short, momentum, and so on (the full list of 32 considered styles can be found in the appendix A on page 45). While using some style of investing, institutional investors are naturally concentrated on a smaller group of stocks, what results in reducing of their informational costs, a better ability to advertise and communicate their services to retail investors or even compare their performance with other funds. Some literature proposes the idea where each stock necessarily belongs to a single style category; however, an individual stock can be held simultaneously by funds using different investment styles. Style investing is so widespread that Thomson Reuters provides detailed information about the categorization of the institutional investors among 32 different investment styles with the stock holdings of their portfolios, as they have to report them in their quarterly US 13F filings. This unique data set can provide very useful information about the behaviour of the institutional investors according to their investment style, which can be later used to base an investment strategy. In institutional investor practice, some stocks are in demand by many styles; however, other stocks seem to be “unattractive”, being in demand by only a few styles or even only a single style. A lower number of styles holding a particular stock implicates a smaller base of the investor’s interest and also a higher inattention. The manager’s desirability to hold a stock, or the stock attention or inattention, can thus be measured by the number of styles pursuing the stock in their portfolios and the relative volume of the stock they hold. This inattention can be measured by the Herfindahl index H of the participation of the different investor styles in each stock. Higher style inattention H (fewer investor styles with lower volume) is followed by economically, and statistically significant higher stock returns over the next quarter as well as over subsequent quarters. Based on the aforementioned fact, a profitable and statistically significant strategy can be constructed, which sorts stocks into the decile portfolios according to their H index and shorts the lowest, while longs the highest decile.

Fundamental reason
The last two decades of fund style concentration and inattention in the ownership of stocks is related to the future stock returns in a systematic way. The positive association of H and subsequent stock returns could be a result of a risk premium, or it could be a result of mispricing that stems from a temporary demand shock which would get corrected gradually over time. However, authors view the association of H and the returns as a risk premium, arguing that the association stays strong for the long horizons, particularly when other associations related to the style investing switch signs, like the stock price momentum or the style momentum. Research about H is in line with the other literature which claims that due to the lack of information or the lack of investor attention, stocks earn an extra premium over and above the premium of the traditional CAPM. Moreover, econometric evidence supports the claim that higher style inattention H is followed by economically and statistically significant higher stock returns over the next quarter and these returns stay statistically high in the subsequent quarters – up to the four years ahead. This positive association is present even when one controls for the simultaneous influence of a number of third variables, that predict stock returns and are also correlated with the style inattention. The alpha of the long-short portfolio on H, constructed from a Fama-French five-factor model is 0.84% per month with a t-statistic equal to 3,60. This evidence suggests that the association of H with subsequent stock returns does not stem from any known systematic risk factor. Other considered variables include idiosyncratic volatility, share turnover, liquidity, leverage, Book-to-market, stock price momentum, style momentum, style beta, institutional ownership, and the shares of the individual styles themselves.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all common stocks trading on the NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ (codes 10 and 11 of CRSP). Excluded are stocks which do not have the ownership data or have less than three-quarters of data. The data are also cleaned from obvious errors, like stocks with negative B/M ratio or with reported institutional ownership above 100% and also from the stocks which have the institutional ownership less than 10% of the supply of the stock in any given quarter.

Firstly, measure the inattention in stock i by its style concentration variable Hi. Let the variable w i,q,s represent the percentual participation of the investment style s in stock i during quarter q. The total number of the different investment styles is denoted as S and the percentage participation of each style in the stock i sums up to unity across all existing styles, so the sum from s=1 to S of w i,q,s is equal to the 1.

Style concentration Hi,q in the ownership of stock i during quarter q is defined as the Herfindahl index of the percentage shares wi,q,s and is equal to the w i,q,s squared. The construction of the variable Hi,q implicates that it can take values in half closed interval of 0 and 1 (where one is included). The high value of H means that only a few styles follow and hold the stock, or there is a high style inattention in stock i. On the other hand, low values mean that the ownership of the stock is dispersed across many different styles, showing high style interest in stock i, or low style inattention.

In each quarter, sort the stocks into deciles accordingly to their value of H, with each of the ten portfolios including an equal number of shares. Long the highest decile and short the lowest decile. The portfolio is equally-weighted and is rebalanced at a quarterly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Based on the source research paper (see for example tables 3), the strategy has a strongly negative correlation against index therefore probably can be used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets.