Price momentum is a well-known anomaly with a simple idea that the price of an asset that has been rising in the recent past will continue to rise in the near future, and vice versa, an asset that has been falling in the recent past will continue to fall in the near future. Traditionally, the momentum is exploited by evaluation of the performance of the given asset during a historical window, and past winners are candidates for a long position, and past losers are candidates for a short position. According to this novel research, there are three major drawbacks connected with the traditional approach. Firstly, such an approach relies on a backtest that tries to design the best properties of the strategy only once and based only on the historical data. However, such an approach is based on experience or trial and error without considering the multiple ways in which features can be computed. Secondly, there could be a problem that the strategy is overfitted on historical data, and there is not a mechanism within the traditional approach that would check or minimize overfitting. In a simple way, the strategy that works great in the past (because it’s designed to work like that) would not work in the future. Thirdly, traditional momentum strategies are connected with under-performance at market turning points. Turning points cause that the momentum strategies lose some of its cumulative profits because it takes time to conclude that momentum has turned negative after a period of rising prices and vice versa. Therefore, this paper suggests a different approach that uses machine learning or to be more precise logistic regression. While using only price data and the momentum and maximal drawdowns for various periods, logistic regression outperforms the SPX using the factors, their combination and mainly their appropriate weights. Last but not least, the paper uses only the price data; therefore, it should be understood as a building block and inspiration. For example, there could also be added to other non-price factors.

Fundamental reason
The momentum factor is nothing new in the investing world since it is recognized and used in practice. The novel approach is the usage of machine learning. Such strategies have the ability to be trained and adapted to changing market conditions using more numerous and more complex combinations. A model with hundred parameters is not a problem for machine learning algorithms; however for the classical statistics, such model presents a complicated problem. Therefore, the main benefit of such approach, especially with the usage of polynomials that allow using non-linear features, is the usage of the high amount of factors that are weighted differently according to the market conditions (or the training set of the algorithm). Additionally, the logistic regression momentum-based strategy could also be successfully applied to another US or international equity indices.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of SPX Index (can be easily traded by using futures or ETFs). Firstly, input features include drawdowns and momentum over various historical time windows that are normalized to zero-mean over time within a range of -1 to +1. Historical windows for momentum are based on the following numbers of business days: 30, 60, 90, 120, 180, 270, 300 and 360, and for drawdowns are based on 15, 60, 90 and 120 business days.

Features are used to predict profitability vector where each daily value (a component of the vector) is either one or zero depending on whether future profitability exceeds a minimum annual profitability threshold of 5%. To identify non-linear patterns, new features are created automatically from the basic features it was seeded with. Paper suggests to use cubic polynomials (if you have only two variables, for example, x and y, cubic polynomials are the third power of x plus third power of y plus second power of x multiplied by y plus x multiplied by the second power of y and so on…), since such approach is connected with the best combination of simplicity, return and drawdowns.

Features and their combination are evaluated each day and combined with weights. Weighted factors are the inputs to the sigmoid function (page 8). The daily weights of each feature are found by minimizing the prediction error between actual future performance and the performance predicted by the sigmoid function overtraining sets of historical data (cost function to minimize is on page 9, the regularization parameter is set to 1). Predictions are made three days ahead, each day. If the algorithm predicts that the return would not exceed the minimal threshold, stay in cash. Otherwise, the strategy is invested in SPX at market close (or remains invested). Therefore, the strategy is rebalanced daily.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The selected strategy is a class of “Market Timing” strategies that try to rotate out of equities during a time of stress. Therefore the proposed strategy isn’t mainly used as an add-on to a portfolio to hedge equity risk directly, but it is more an overlay that can be used to manage the percentual representation of equities (or “equity-like assets”) in a portfolio. “Equity Market Timing” strategy can decrease the overall risk of equities in a portfolio, and it can improve the risk-adjusted returns. Moreover, as strategy’s goal is to hold equity market only in positive times for equity market factor and be out of equities otherwise, therefore this logic can be maybe used to create amended market timing strategy (using original rules) which is out of equities during positive times and holds bonds (or goes short equities) during bad times. This new amended strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. However, performance/risk characteristics and overall correlation and quality of suggested amended strategy can be found out only by rigorous backtest and source academic research paper doesn’t give us any clues on how it will perform…