Stronger economies tend to influence their neighbours. A well-known example of this pattern is the performance of the U.S stock market and stock markets of other (surrounding) countries. Novel research shows that the predictability of the U.S. stock market vis-a-vis other countries is only one speciﬁc case of a more general, systematic pattern shaping the strength of cross-country relations in international stock market returns. As a paper suggests, it is safe to say that in general, larger countries’ stock market returns lead to small-countries’ returns. Moreover, this cross-country predictability is stronger if the two countries are geographically located closer to each other. The aforementioned can be potentially utilized in a trading strategy based on the empirical ﬁndings that provide support for a strong “gravitational” force behind contemporaneous and predictive relations in international equity returns (the author applies Newton’s law of universal gravitation to investigate the determinants of those bilateral relations in returns). The strength of contemporaneous co-movements between two countries and their stock market returns is stronger, if the combined mass of the two countries (sum of their economic size) is greater and the two countries are geographically closer to each other.
Additionally, as in the U.S stock market example, the cross-country return predictability is better, if the predictor country is larger than the predictand country. Overall, as the author states, the results suggest that the relevance of one country’s stock market return for those of other countries is positively associated with its relative economic size and negatively associated with geographical distance. Therefore, constructing a “Gravity” signal that would consist of the weighted-average of the surrounding countries’ stock market returns (basically it is a weighted momentum strategy of geographically close countries) can be utilized to construct a country-rotation portfolio. Last but not least, the paper examines strategies based on domestic, foreign or combined information. Still, we would focus our attention only on the foreign information for the simplicity and representative purposes of this novel idea.

Fundamental reason
Consistent with the gravity hypothesis, the paper has found that firstly, there are stronger contemporaneous co-movements if the combined mass of two countries is greater. Secondly, the cross-country predictability is more pronounced if the size of the economy for a predictor country is larger than that of the predictand country and lastly, both the contemporaneous and predictive beta loadings are higher if the two countries are located closer to each other, for both cash-ﬂow and discount-rate news. Additionally, results also suggest that country-size and distance still play important roles in shaping the strength of contemporaneous and predictive relations in international stock market returns, even after controlling for the size of ﬁrms or industries. The main idea why the strategy should work is based on the fact that the strength of economic links between two countries can be eﬀectively captured by the geographical distance since it is a barrier to interaction among economic agents due to language, institutional, regulatory, historical and cultural diﬀerences. To sum it up in the plain language, the performance of economically bigger countries influences surrounding smaller countries. Therefore, by measuring the distance of two countries and taking into account their economic power, one can construct weights that would be used to weigh past returns of surrounding countries forming a strategy that would naturally utilize the fact that bigger countries influences surrounding smaller countries and predicts returns in the future.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of equity market indices for 44 countries. Firstly, calculate the aggregate distance between two countries, based on bilateral distances between the largest cities of those two countries, where those inter-city distances are being weighted by the share of the city in the overall country’s population (equation 1, page 7). At the end of each month t − 1, measure the gravity Z-score of country i (from the perspective of country d) based on the cross-sectional variation of the size of a country i (size is represented by the lagged log of GDP by three months) and Z-score of the distance between country d and i, where the distance is defined as the log of the aggregate distance between country d and i from the equation 1 (both formulas can be found on page 30).
Nextly, compute the total gravity score from the perspective of country d as the Z score of size for country i minus the Z-score of the distance between country d and i. Lastly, calculate the weights using the total gravity score given to each of surrounding countries from the perspective of country d (equation 5, page 31) and compute the Gravity measure at time t for country d as the weighted sum of past month returns (if the lookback period is 1month, the paper studies also other options). The weighted sum does not include the country d (because of the usage of only foreign information). Based on the Gravity measure, sort countries into quintiles and long the top quintile. The strategy is rebalanced monthly, and the portfolio is value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only therefore it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).