The value effect is a well-known anomaly described many times in academic literature. There are many ways to define “value stocks”, but usually stocks with a high level of earnings, cash flow or book value compared to market capitalization or total company value are considered value stocks -> where investors receive firms with strong current fundamentals in exchange for their money. Analysts and investors usually use the most current fundamentals of forward-looking estimates to identify value stocks. However, there is a growing number of studies which built upon classical work of Benjamin Graham and use long-term averages to identify value companies. Academic studies show that this “long-term” approach could be successful. Strategies built upon inflation adjusted long term valuation measures show robust outperformance no matter which particular ratio is used (earnings, cash flow, book value, etc.). Research also shows that combination of value stocks with a momentum filter is particularly fruitful and such strategy has increased risk/return characteristics compared to basic value or momentum strategies.

Fundamental reason
Adding more years increases the power of the P/B ratio to predict returns as it smoothes out price and book value during a business cycle. Value firms (with low price to book ratios) statistically outperform market returns, and this fact is currently not very challenged. A usual explanation for value over-performance is that investors overreact to growth aspects for growth stocks, and value stocks are therefore undervalued. Adding momentum filter to value stocks helps to distinguish between value stocks with improving fundamentals (and therefore rising price) and weaker stocks, which improves the performance of basic value strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ firms above the NYSE 40th percentile for the market value of equity. All REITS, ADRS, closed-end funds, and financial firms are eliminated. Each firm must have at least ten years of fundamental data available for analysis.

Each month, investor calculates cyclically adjusted book-to-market ratios for each company using the current price and averaged normalized inflation-adjusted book value for the past ten years. Stocks are then sorted into deciles and investor picks top decile (stocks with the highest Book–to-Market) to further evaluation. Stocks from this decile are then sorted into halves based on past 12-2 month momentum (calculated as the cumulative returns from month -12 to month -2).

Stocks from the high momentum half are included in the portfolio and are equally weighted. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only therefore it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).