Pairs trading is a very common statistical arbitrage method that has already widely been established, especially within equity markets. In time these markets have quickly become efficient and hence arbitrage opportunities have been exhausted and hence rendered non existent. However, the cryptocurrency market is comparatively young and has not reached this level of efficiency. Therefore, the authors of this paper have looked to establish and study the potential application of pairs trading in the cryptocurrency market.

To make use of pairs trading, as detailed by the authors, there are two important things to establish: selection and trading methodology. Within this paper, and in our strategy, the distance method is used for selection and a fixed threshold method is used for trading. In doing so, a valid strategy to utilise pairs trading in crypto markets is established.

The strategy we use surrounds buying and selling paired coins when their distance exceeds a chosen threshold. Intuitively, this distance between the coins will inevitably return to the average distance, as a result of the law of large numbers, in time and so a guaranteed profit can be made.

Fundamental reason
­The functionality of this strategy is based on the concept of mean-reversion or as statistically denoted: ther law of large numbers. This guarantees that in time a variable will converge to its true mean value. In the case of this strategy, our variable will be the distance between the prices of our chosen pairs. Our strategy involving trading when this discrepancy exceeds a threshold is hence justified as a result of this concept as we see that the distance will undoubtedly return to its average and therefore we are guaranteed a profit; our strategy is a statistical arbitrage strategy.

The authors further prove the existence and reliability of mean reversion through testing with empirical data. They used a 2:1 time split on the time series of coin prices to obtain a formation period and trading period. The formation period is used to find the pairs and the trading period to test the strategy at hand. In doing so, it was seen that the mean-reversion phenomena is indeed existent in crypto markets and can indeed be used to establish and use pairs trading as a statistical arbitrage strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the top 20 coins, sorted by market capitalisation, traded in the cryptocurrency market. The total sample has been split into in-sample (formation period) and out-of-sample (trading period) with a ratio of 2 : 1. The variables of interest are the chosen pairs (i,j), fixed average distances Dij , the threshold, the current distance on day t Sij(t), the standard deviation of distances in prices of (i,j) 𝜎(t), and a z-score at time t z(t). The chosen pairs are found through finding (i,j) such that the sum of all squared residuals in price points of pairs is minimised. In doing so, we obtain our chosen pairs (i,j). From here we can compute the fixed average distances Dij simply as the average distance in coins i and j’s prices over the time series. For every trading period, 6 pairs with the smallest distance are picked. The standard deviation of distance of price of pair (i,j) can be computed conventionally. Then we set a threshold from preference; often choosing 2 𝜎(t). We define a process Sij(t) that tracks the distances between coins’ i and j prices. Lastly, we can define a z-score at time t, z(t) = (Sij(t) – Dij)/𝜎(t). When our z-score z(t) exceeds the chosen threshold, we will buy/sell the same amount of the coins in the pair respective to which one is priced higher/lower. We can then close the position when the distance returns under the threshold. Coins are weighted equally and the portfolio is rebalanced daily.