Investors are primarily interested in the return on investment. As a result, it is no surprise that return predictions have become an essential part of the financial literature. Albeit it is commonly a target for forward-looking predictions, risk (often measured as volatility) is the second crucial characteristic of the investment. It is a common practice to model the volatility as a time series and use corresponding statistical approaches to predict values in the future. Chun et al. (2022) took a different perspective and examined whether the volatility is predictable using machine-learning methods with numerous variables that are or could be linked to the volatility. The approach where several classes of variables such as US stock market, option-related, sentiment, macro, global market, and commodity are used resembles a common approach of ML-based investing strategies where a large set of variables is used, and the algorithms are used to find the important variables and relationships.
Firstly, the authors examine the statistical properties of their volatility predictions – for several horizons (daily, weekly and monthly) with promising results. Secondly, the paper examines volatility targeting strategies that allocate into a risky asset (S&P 500) or risk-free asset (T-bills) based on the predicted volatility. Overall, the strategies are shown to have better Sharpe ratios than the market. The research is a vital addition to volatility-targeting literature since it uses a forward-looking volatility estimate (prediction).

Fundamental reason
The volatility targeting aims to lower exposure when the risk is high and increase the exposure when the risk is low. Therefore, it seeks to protect the investor in high-risk periods and benefit in the low-risk periods. Furthermore, the volatility targeting proposed by the paper is improved by accurate ML predictions compared to the past realized volatility. Therefore, the investment decision is based on a forward-looking prediction instead of a backward-looking observation. Lastly, the functionality could also be attributed to the machine learning method itself (Lasso regression) since it can perform a variable selection, and the prediction results are more robust and less overfitted.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P 500 index and 3-months treasury bills. Firstly, the daily open-to-open realized volatility is decomposed into open-to-close and close-to-open volatility. For open-to-close volatility, apply the pre-averaging RV estimator of Jacod, Li, Mykland, and Podolskij (2009). The close-to-open volatility is estimated as the squared overnight return. Therefore, the final estimate for daily volatility is open to close pre-averaged RV plus the squared overnight return. The weekly volatility is defined as the sum of five daily volatilities divided by 5. The predicted variable is the weekly volatility; the predictors include the US stock market, option-related, sentiment, macro, global market, and commodity variables (see Table 1 for the full list). Predictions are obtained by recursively training Lasso regression using 500 days of data, where 400 days are used for training and 100 for validation. Finally, allocate between S&P 500 (risky asset) with weight w and t-bills (safe asset) with weight (1-w), where the optimal weight is equal to the inverse of the risk-aversion (assumed to be equal to 3 in the paper) multiplied by a target volatility (one-year rolling standard deviation of the S&P 500 returns) that is divided by the predicted volatility. The optimal weight is capped between -3 and 3. The positions are assumed to be opened 15 seconds after the market opens, and the daily return is defined as the open-to-open return. The strategy is rebalanced weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Not mentioned.