Momentum/trend-following has become a traditional strategy for currency trading. Past winners tend to continue to perform well, and past losers tend to continue to do badly. To enhance returns, an algorithm based on three crossovers of exponential moving averages with different time horizons is used to generate the momentum signal. Three different crossovers identify short, intermediate and long-term trends respectively. A signal is generated for each time horizon and signals are then combined to build the trade signal. This approach offers more than just a simple trading signal to buy or to sell, the magnitude of the signal and therefore, the volume of the investment is the added value of the algorithm. Using the aforementioned, profitable time series portfolio with a simple composition is invented. Our focus is centred around G10 currencies, but it’s worth mentioning that the paper also includes research about emerging market currencies which slowly start to outperform G10 currencies while using the algorithm discussed above. The strategy could also be applied to cryptocurrencies.

Fundamental reason
Momentum returns contradict the efficient market hypothesis. The trends of currencies are easily recognized by the trading algorithm and therefore, can be used to enhance returns. The complexity of the algorithm is another reason for its functionality. The exponential moving average is an infinite impulse response filter with exponentially decaying weights to ensure that the newest data have the biggest weight. Three different time periods were selected to capture short, intermediate and long trends. Normalization intensifies the signal for periods where the volatility is low and lowers signals in periods where the volatility is high. The response function is used to have the signal values in the interval between -1 and 1. The final weighted sum defines the magnitude of the signal and therefore, the volume of the investment.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of G10 currencies. The foreign currency is always used as the base currency and the USD as the quote currency. Firstly, calculate the exponential moving averages (EMAs) of currency rates. A short and a long EMA for three different time periods is calculated (equation number 3, page 4). Short EMAs are for 8,16 and 32 days while long EMAs are for 24, 48 and 96 days. The period where the short EMA lies above the long EMA indicates a positive trend, and on the other hand, in the period where the short EMA lies below the long EMA, the trend is negative. The first signal is formed as a difference between short and long EMA (equation 5, page 5). The sign of the first signal determines whether one goes long or short in the currency. The series of the first signal is normalized (normalization intensifies the signal for periods where the volatility is low and lowers signals in periods where the volatility is high) with the three-month moving standard deviation of the exchange rate (equation 6, page 6). The resulting time series is normalized again with its moving standard deviation over one year (equation 7, page 6). Next, the signal is calculated using response function (response function is used to have the signal values in the interval between -1 and 1) and normalized series (equation 8, page 6). The final signal is calculated as the weighted sum of previous signals (for every period, using equation 12 on page 7). Long currencies with positive signal and short currencies with a negative signal. Invest in all currencies according to the value of the signal divided by 10 (number of currencies). The portfolio is rebalanced daily, and a leverage ratio of 5 to 1 is used.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. Trend-following currency strategies usually have a negative correlation to equities; therefore proposed strategy can be negatively correlated too, but rigorous backtest is needed to asses if this is the case …