Merger arbitrage is a classical arbitrage strategy trying to exploit inefficiencies in the stock price of a company which has agreed to be sold to another company for cash, stock, or a combination of both. Merger arbitrage strategy (long acquired stocks and short acquirer) offers positive payout as investor/arbitrageur is compensated for the risk of merger breakout. The most simple version of strategy trades every announced merger. However, academic research shows that it is possible to use the length of the time from the merger announcement to improve the strategy’s performance. Hazard rates of completion vary strongly over event time and are hump-shaped. Hazard rates (defined as the probability that a merger will complete in event week n conditional on it not completing or withdrawing prior to week n) rise from zero in the first weeks after the announcement, peak around event week 20, and then decline to zero one year after announcement. Returns are predictable, and they move with the hump-shaped hazard rates. The research discovered that strategy that invests in equity-financed mergers experiences a mean return of around 15 basis points per week in the first few weeks after the merger announcement. Returns peak at nearly 50 basis points per week around event week 20 and then decline as more time passes after the announcement.

Fundamental reason
Research states that the passage of time during the interim period (length of time from merger announcement) contains information about whether the deal will ultimately complete. Anomaly is explained by agents suffering from limited attention and underreact to the absence of news. This underreaction can lead to misallocation of resources.

Simple trading strategy
Investment universe consists of all stocks from NYSE, Amex and Nasdaq. The investor monitors every announced merger. The strategy is constructed by investing only in deals that, that at the beginning of each calendar month, are active in event weeks 16 to 39. If no deals are active in the relevant event window in a given calendar month, the investor invests in the risk-free rate for that month. Investor goes long target and short acquirer stocks. Stocks are weighted equally, and the portfolio is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.