Authors study the various effects of corporate cash holdings on stock returns and their effect on betas. Cash held by companies often does not perform well in relative terms, except for periods of extreme situations (cash returns increased dramatically during the Covid-19 pandemic). Study findings can help investors explicitly account for those effects in their portfolio selection decisions. According to the authors, the efficient frontier of portfolios is much steeper in cash-hedged terms, implying a tangency portfolio with more expected return per unit of risk. We can conclude that authors successfully presented that cash-hedged returns generally have higher returns and Sharpe ratios, and combinations of cash-hedged factors outperform combinations of standard (i.e., not cash-hedged) factors. Or in other words, the returns are high enough to offset their higher volatility. This is mostly facilitated for stocks with highest momentum factor, and this strategy is built on this crucial finding.

Fundamental reason
Implications from worse performance of cash-rich companies can be successfully eliminated by shorting cash-portion of the stock. This is, however, not very efficient and authors propose new approach. Rather than that, scientist estimate cash related returns as in section 4, and simply create portfolios from best performing stocks in these terms. Those portfolios are called Cash-Hedged Portfolios. Simplified, the returns are calculated using each firm’s cash-hedged returns rather than the firm’s standard stock return to calculate the value-weighted returns, which are basis for our strategy. Paper proposes two related assumptions. First, the value of corporate cash is distinct and separable from the value of the firm’s primary business. Second, firms’ cash returns are correlated. When investors hedge out the correlated cash returns, the resulting cash-hedged returns are less correlated, yielding portfolios that provide better diversification. Methodology scientists incorporate consists of two main steps: First, of decomposing a company’s stock return into its cash and non-cash components. Secondly, they use the decomposed return to compare a company’s standard—that is, not cash-hedged—beta with its cash-hedged beta. This results in showing that controlling for the cash bias in standard betas provides investors with a richer covariance structure across stocks, which allows them to create relatively more risk-efficient portfolios.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks (excluding REITS, ADRs, preferred shares, and financial firms) traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDQ, with share price > $1. Data points are collected from Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) and Compustat. Our portfolio is created from best performing stocks as denoted by highest momentum factor from 25 cash-hedged portfolio calculation results. We decompose standard betas into their cash-hedged betas and an adjustment term under two pricing models: the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) and the Fama–French three-factor model. Cash and non-cash components of several value-weighted portfolios and their returns are calculated as shown on equations (3) and (4). Momentum is defined as a stock’s gross return from the beginning of month t−12 to the end of month t−2 (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993; Asness, 1994; Grinblatt and Moskowitz, 2004), including omission of a stock’s return over month t − 1. We construct long-only value-weighted cash-hedged portfolio sorted in a single sort (by one factor only) which is rebalanced monthly. Stocks’ value weights are determined monthly by their beginning of month market capitalizations.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - While not explicitly discussed, backtest indicates it could be a good choice for diversification if there’s a want or need to be invested in equities.