Fama and French (F&F) is a multifactor asset pricing model developed in 1992 that expands on the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). This model considers the size factor “small minus big” (SMB) and the value factor “high minus low” (HML) on top of the market risk factor from the CAPM. Subsequently, in 1997 Carhart exposed the momentum factor (MOM), and in 2015 F&F and Hou acknowledged the importance of the investment factor “conservative minus aggressive” (CMA) and profitability factor “robust minus weak” (RMB). The previously mentioned factors speak for long-short portfolios combining a long position in those with positive exposure to the specific factor and a short position in those with negative exposure.

This paper analyses the risk and return characteristics of multifactor portfolios in the U.S. stock market during good and bad times, using passive sector investing as the benchmark. Authors keep track of portfolio performance over long periods, which allows them to monitor the consequences of financial crises. Using the Markowitz model, authors seek diversification benefits and risk premia by computing distances in the mean-variance plan. The goal is to determine whether multifactor investing beats well-diversified passive investing regularly or if the lack of diversification among factors leads to potential loss.

Last but not least, the authors acquired that factor investing beats sector investing for long-short portfolios in all respects. On the other hand, long-only factor investing tends to be more profitable than the benchmark during good times but less attractive during bad times, when diversification is essential.

Fundamental reason
Factor investing is very well documented by academics. The past research shows strong support for the functionality of factor investing and demonstrates that anomalies could be used together to increase a portfolio’s profitability, which the authors confirm.

Firstly, the authors create ten sector portfolios based on the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC): nondurable consumer goods, durable consumer goods, manufacturing, energy, high tech, telecom, shops, health, utilities, and others, and the factor portfolios based on size, value, profitability, investment, and momentum. In reality, these factors are not investible, but investors can trade exchange-traded funds or factor-based mutual funds.

Secondly, they determine the efficient frontier for both sector and factor portfolios using the Markowitz model. They construct the market portfolio whose return is the value-weighted average of the returns of all NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq-listed U.S. firms and compare it with the efficient frontier. The first test introduced by Basak (2002) is based on the “horizontal distance”, which measures the volatility gap between the market portfolio and its same return efficient counterpart. Briére (2013) proposed the “vertical distance” measuring the distance between the expected return of the market portfolio and the expected return of its same-variance portfolio from an efficient frontier. Eventually, the authors exploit both vertical and horizontal distances.

Afterward, they compare Jensen’s alpha and Sharpe ratio of portfolios built with sectors and factors and examine the efficient portfolio maximizing Sharpe ratio, the minimum volatility portfolio, and the equally weighted portfolio. Lastly, they run both in-sample and out-of-sample tests, which increases the robustness of the tests. As already mentioned, the results reveal that factor investing dominates sector investing when short sales are unrestricted.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all AMEX, NYSE, and NASDAQ-listed U.S. stocks. The data come from Kenneth French’s website. Create factor portfolios based on five factors: size, value, momentum, investment, and profitability. Using the Markowitz model, construct a long-short efficient portfolio maximizing the Sharpe ratio. Each month run out-of-sample estimation using previous 60-month data.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The paper analyses the risk and return characteristics of multifactor portfolios in the U.S. stock market during good and bad times, using passive sector investing as the benchmark. Authors keep track of portfolio performance over long periods, which allows them to monitor the consequences of financial crises.