The low-risk anomaly (LRA) index is the key variable of interest in this novel research paper. The measures of market risk, idiosyncratic risk, and lottery-likeliness are used to identify high-risk stocks. Specifically, the market beta measures the magnitude of stock exposure to changes in the aggregate equity market portfolio. Secondly, the idiosyncratic volatility proxies for firm-specific risk due to the inherent factors that can negatively impact an individual stock. And lastly, the lottery demands capture investors’ preference for lottery-like stocks with a small probability of a large payoff. The authors propose a low-risk anomaly (LRA) index with high values indicating high-risk stocks with high-beta, high-volatility, and high lottery-payoffs. Nextly, they investigate the significance of the LRA index for the U.S. equities and find that stocks with high LRA generate a low risk-adjusted return (alpha), and this negative cross-sectional relation between the LRA index and future returns is driven by underperformance of the high-LRA stocks.
For the first time in the literature, this paper provides direct evidence that the high-LRA stocks are subject to significant overpricing, whereas the degree of underpricing of low-LRA stocks is so small that the low-risk anomaly is driven by retail investors’ demand for high-LRA stocks, leading to temporary overpricing and negative future abnormal returns for this high-beta, high-volatility stocks with large lottery payoffs.
Furthermore, the evidence is also provided for non-U.S. equity markets. The low-risk anomaly is significant in developed markets as well. The anomaly can be found in the G10 and G7 countries. Similar results are obtained from various country groupings: the high-LRA stocks earn significantly lower risk-adjusted returns than the low-LRA stocks.

Fundamental reason
The magnitude of the negative alpha spread on LRA-sorted high-low portfolios is larger for stocks predominantly held by retail investors. In contrast, the return predictability disappears for stocks primarily held by institutional investors. The observation that individual investors play an essential role in low-risk anomalies raises an important question. Given that the direct stock ownership rate across the population is particularly low, how can so few individual investors affect equilibrium asset prices and contribute to the asset pricing puzzles?
In the paper, the authors provide the first empirical evidence that the highly skewed distribution of wealth (Saez and Zucman, 2016; Piketty, 2015) offers a potential explanation for the low-risk anomalies. The hypothesis shows that if most of the wealth is concentrated in the hands of a small number of rich households, then a small subset of individual investors can affect asset prices despite the low stock market participation rates.
Furthermore, its shown that the demand of the wealthy households is distinct from that of non-rich households and institutional investors. For example, there is no significant cross-sectional relation between the LRA index and future returns when considering the investments of the non-wealthy individuals. Overall, the results imply that the demand of rich households mainly drives the low-risk anomalies.
Lastly, after investigating the economic forces underlying this relationship, the wealthy individuals’ skewness preferences explain their taste for high-risk stocks with high-beta, high-volatility, and high-lottery-payoffs. Specifically, the LRA index no longer predicts the cross-sectional differences in future stock returns once the lottery demand of wealthy investors is under control.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ).
First, estimate the market beta (BETA), idiosyncratic volatility(IVOL), and lottery-like payoffs (MAX) for each stock and each month. BETA of an individual stock is the slope coefficient from time-series regressions of daily excess stock returns on daily excess market returns over the past one year. IVOL of an individual stock is calculated as the standard deviation of the residuals from time-series regressions of the daily excess stock returns on the daily excess market returns and the daily size (SMB) and book-to-market factor returns of the FF3 model in a month. MAX is calculated as the average of five highest daily returns in each month of a stock’s lottery payoff. Then, construct the LRA index by sorting stocks into decile portfolios in increasing order based on BETA, IVOL, and MAX. All three univariate sorts are carried out independently and then each stock is given the corresponding score of its decile rank for these three variables. The LRA index is the sum of the three scores so that it ranges from 3 to 30 and its higher values indicate higher risk. Based on their LRA index sort them into decile portfolios. The strategy goes with a long position in the portfolio of highest LRA stocks (decile 10) and a short position in the portfolio of lowest LRA stocks (decile 1). The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide infomation about the hedging properties for US stocks.