China has the world’s second-largest stock market, helping to finance economy that some predict will be the world’s largest within a decade. China also has political and economic environments quite different from those in the US and other developed economies. Moreover, China’s market and investors are separated from the rest of the world. China largely prohibits participation by foreign investors in its domestic stock market as well as participation by its domestic investors in foreign markets.
In this paper, authors explore and develop factor models in China, allowing its unique environment to dictate alternative approaches. Size and value are the most prominent characteristics used by many institutions to classify investment styles. The most widely used nonmarket factors in academic research are also size and value. This study reveals that size and value effects are important in China but with properties different from the US. Three-factor model, CH-3, is constructed, including the market factor as well as size and value factors incorporating the above China-special elements. An alternative three-factor model, FF-3, is constructed as well, by simply replicating the Fama and French (1993) procedure. After the examination, it is found that CH-3 strongly dominates FF-3. The reason is that the FF-3 model cannot price the CH-3 size and value factors. Overall, CH-3 performs well as a factor model in China, and it captures the most documented anomalies.
This strategy is related to the value factor, but the size factor is also included in our screener. A notable difference compared to the classical value factor is that the EP ratio (inverse of PE ratio) measures the value in China.

Fundamental reason
The value effect in China is best captured by the earnings-price (EP) ratio, versus other valuation ratios. The study analyses which variable best captures the cross-sectional variation in average stock returns. A horse race is run among all candidate valuation ratios, including EP, book-to-market (BM), asset-to-market, and cash-flow-to-price ratios. The superiority of EP in China is demonstrated at least in two ways. First, in an investigation paralleling Fama and French (1992), cross-sectional regressions reveal that EP subsumes other valuation ratios, including BM, in explaining average stock returns. Second, the three-factor model, CH-3, with its EP-based value factor, dominates the alternative FF-3 model, with its BM-based value factor. In a head-to-head model comparison, CH-3 prices both the size and value factors in FF-3, whereas FF-3 prices neither of the size and value factors in CH-3.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Chinese stocks with common shares from Wind Information Inc. (WIND). First, eliminate the smallest 30% of stocks. Second, construct a value factor based on EP; otherwise, follow the procedure used by Fama and French (1993). Each month, separate the remaining 70% of stocks into two size groups, small (S) and big (B), split at the median market value of that universe. Break that universe into three EP groups: top 30% (value, V), middle 40% (middle, M), and bottom 30% (growth, G). Then use the intersections of those groups to form value-weighted portfolios for the six resulting size-EP combinations: S/V, S/M, S/G, B/V, B/M, and B/G. When forming value-weighted portfolios, weight each stock by the market capitalization of all its outstanding A shares, including nontradable shares. Finally, combine the portfolios to construct the value factors as follows: the sum of S/V and B/V divided by two, minus the sum of B/G and S/G divided by two. Portfolios are value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - According to the paper, the VMG factor in China has a negative correlation to the market factor of -0.24.