Academics have started to document that commercial hedging pressure (defined as the number of long futures contracts divided by the total number of futures contracts) has predictive ability for spot markets. The same is correct for volatility measured by VIX. A combination of these two variables could be used to time the S&P 500 market. Strategy performance (minimum variance version) beats benchmark (pure S&P 500 index) with a high margin in a bear market (2000-2006). Other versions of this strategy (maximum performance version) have even better results; however, the research paper presents their results only for a bull market (1992-2000), which doesn’t look sufficient for us to show it here. Yet, we recommend at least to review and study these versions as well.

Fundamental reason
Volatility based on VIX is a forward-looking variable indicating participants’ fears and, therefore, could have a forecasting ability. The hedging pressure variable indicates the current hedging needs for market participants, which also has forecasting value.


Simple trading strategy
Open interest is defined as the total of all futures contracts entered into and not yet closed out by an offsetting transaction. The aggregate of all long open interest is equal to the aggregate of all short open interest. Hedging pressure is defined as the total commercial long positions divided by the sum of long and short commercial positions. Linear regression is then used to forecast excess market return (market return-risk free return), with volatility based on VIX, hedging pressure, and open interest as independent variables. This excess market return for the S&P index and S&P volatility are then used as inputs in the optimization calculation to determine the optimal weights of equities and risk-free assets in the next period. Optimization looks for a minimum variance portfolio and could be calculated analytically or numerically. The weights calculated in optimization are used in the immediate trading period. Regression and optimization calculations are performed each month, and the portfolio is rebalanced accordingly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The selected strategy is a class of “Market Timing” strategies that try to rotate out of equities during the time of stress. Therefore the proposed strategy isn’t mainly used as an add-on to a portfolio to hedge equity risk directly, but it is more an overlay that can be used to manage the percentual representation of equities (or “equity-like assets”) in a portfolio. “Equity Market Timing” strategy can decrease the overall risk of equities in a portfolio, and it can improve the risk-adjusted returns. Moreover, as strategy’s goal is to hold the equity market only in positive times for equity market factor and be out of equities, otherwise, therefore this logic might be used to create an amended market timing strategy (using original rules), which is out of equities during positive times and holds bonds (or goes short equities) during bad times. This new amended strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. However, performance/risk characteristics and overall correlation and quality of suggested amended strategy can be found out only by rigorous backtest and source academic research paper doesn’t give us any clues on how it will perform…