The standard Markowitz like portfolio selection – a solution of a mean-variance optimization problem – has proven to be unreliable for data which are not normally distributed or at least are not elliptically symmetric. However, the novel research suggests that there could be a way to train conventional portfolio selection. The algorithm proposed by Tsung-wu uses a machine learning approach to form combinations of models referred to as committees. The idea is quite simple – for each optimal portfolio, we need to obtain three basic elements: strategy, covariance matrix and risk type. The main portfolio selection risk measures that are combined to form a committee are a risk-diversification algorithm, mean-variance optimization, and two risk-optimal approaches, conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) and mean-absolute deviation type (MAD). The combination results in many possible “candidate” portfolios. Out of these candidates, the author proposes to choose the best portfolio based on past performance during an evaluation period. Economically significant results are provided for both individual stocks and ETFs, but we centre our attention around the ETF implementation.

Fundamental reason
The fundamental reason for the functionality of the committee portfolio selection is that it uses a combination of different algorithms, risk metrics and covariance matrix estimations as well as it benefits from training, and learning process provided by an approach based on machine learning methods. Furthermore, the standard portfolio selection is merely a solution to an optimization problem which lacks any forward-looking perspective. In machine learning literature, the committee is proven to be an effective way to improve predictive performance and robustness. The back-testing results of large portfolio committee indicate that by implementing the proposed algorithm one obtains the best portfolio out of the 250 optimal portfolios to hold for the consecutive month. Last but not least, the results show that optimality of portfolios is a good predictor of the optimality in the future. Such a result is the crucial and essential condition for the applicability in practice.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of several ETFs: XLB, XLE, XLF, XLP, XLI, XLU, XLV, XLK, XLY, RWR, SPY, EWJ, EWG, EWU, EWC, EWY, EWA, EWH, EWS, IYZ, EZU, IYR, EWT, EWZ, EFA, IGE, EPP, LQD, SHY, IEF and TLT. Firstly, using 12-month daily data, we compute 250 optimal portfolios – we begin with 25 portfolio strategies: optimization of diversified portfolio involves the specification of four solution strategies as objective functions: minrisk, maxreturn, tangency, and global minimum variance. Together with the basic four strategies, the other 21 solutions (Exhibit 4) are augmented from the Sharpe ratio-based tangency portfolio. For every strategy, we compute the covariance matrix in 8 different ways (Sample, GoldSach, LW, ShrinkCC, Student t, Shrinkage, Slpm, Spearman). This process results in 200 portfolios. The residual 50 portfolios are computed with CVaR and MAD approaches, combined with 25 solution strategies. Secondly, evaluate a mean score of every portfolio using two performance ratios: Sharpe ratio and adjusted Sharpe ratio (by skewness and kurtosis), and three different risk measures: standard deviation, value-at-risk as well as conditional value-at-risk (expected shortfall). Therefore the mean score is the average of resulting six Sharpe ratios. Lastly, based on the past 250 trading days, we select the best one’s weight to build a portfolio. The strategy is rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide information on whether the strategy can be used as a hedge to equities