Many defensive assets were tried to hedge equity in market stress times, but some fell too, and the better ones are effective only at market collapse, which is difficult to time. Many studies on hedging concluded in that best hedge is to hold long volatility position in a portfolio. The VIX Index made by CBOE represents the volatility, but there is a problem because that VIX Index is not a tradable instrument. However, the market is very responsive to investors needs, so nowadays, many instruments like futures or options which underlying asset is VIX exists.

The problem is that the VIX derivatives are a too costly hedge. But maybe the answer to a better hedge lies in a knowledge of how the VIX is built. We can try to deconstruct the VIX index to find the S&P 500 options that are leading the VIX movements and use them to build artificial VIX Index position that can be used as a more effective hedge. The options which can be characterized to be the most responsible for driving the movements of the VIX index are ITM puts and ATM calls. Therefore, holding these long (respective short) S&P 500 options contracts provides an alternative to the VIX index with affordable costs. This alternative captures the increase in the VIX so limiting the downturn in S&P 500 with small-scale losses during the market uptrend. The research paper analyses multiple combinations of options simulating VIX, but we will further describe only one of them.

Fundamental reason
Theoretical studies show that VIX index possesses negative correlation of -0,64 to S&P 500 resulting in VIX index performance of an average 16,25% in months of S&P 500’s negative performance compared to -3,45% S&P 500 return over the observed period. But with a similar performance of S&P 500 in positive months 3,07% the VIX performance is less than half at the level of -6,83%. This is the fact why investors want to use volatility as a hedge to the S&P 500 Index. Because if it is used correctly, it gains more in a downtrend, then it loses in an uptrend. The VIX Index is not directly investable. Therefore it is necessary to choose the right volatility-linked instrument and to set the right timing method.

The strategy described in this paper uses a simple structure of options on the S&P 500 with single maturity and monthly rollover, which is straightforward and moreover cost-efficient. The best performance can be made by buying the ITM-OTM put spread and selling the ATM-OTM call spread. This implication was made after in-depth research into calculations of VIX and is accessible in chapter 4.1. of the research paper. The combination of correct options provides the portfolio with access to long volatility exposition while maintaining cost-efficiency. The second requirement is to pick the correct timing method to pick a time when it is most efficient to buy these options. It is set to be the point in time when the value of the VIX index is lower than the mean of VIX plus one standard deviation.

Most of the downside risk which investors wish to hedge is captured by the chosen S&P options spread. However, one disadvantage of the presented method is that the hedging method will still not capture situations when the volatility remains high for longer periods, even though the returns it generates in these situations are satisfactory.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of any replication of the S&P 500 index (for example SPY ETF), and ITM-OTM put, and ATM-OTM call options. The base of the portfolio is S&P 500 index to which are added long ITM-OTM puts and short ATM-OTM calls as a hedge only when VIX index declines to its mean plus one standard deviation. We use P95-P105 and C105-C95 pul/call spreads, as an example.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The most interesting part of this strategy is the hedging portfolio which tries to create an Artificial VIX Index and which is built as a combination of options.