The country size effect is the tendency of the country stock markets with small capitalization to outperform large markets. Another well-known effect is the small firm effect – a phenomenon that small companies significantly outperform large companies. Research convincingly confirmed the existence of the country size premium and additionally discovered an industry size premium (the tendency of small industries outperforming large industries). While both strategies are profitable and statistically significant, from now on, we will centre our focus around the industry size premium. Firstly, the industry size portfolio outperforms the country size portfolio, and secondly, the industry size effect could not be arbitraged away as quickly as the country size effect. Nowadays, the country-level quantitative strategies can be easily implemented with the country Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs). Aforementioned leads to decreasing strategy profits. In contrast, industries of the most developed countries are covered by ETFs only in a small number. Research has also been made which decomposed the market size into four separate components and explored the contribution of these constituents to the development and behaviour of the size premium.

Fundamental reason
Hypotheses say that the return premia of the small sectors and country markets might be driven by similar factors – they may be either a result of behavioural mispricing or compensation for some non-market risk factors. There are four components of the market size (MV) – the momentum (MOM), the long-run return or reversal (REV), the composite equity issuance (ISS) and the 60-month lagged total stock market capitalization (LMV). If factor portfolios (MOM, REV, ISS and LMV) are constructed, pair-wise correlation coefficients between the factor portfolio returns are very low in the industry-based portfolios. The pair-wise correlations ranging from -0.25 to 0.19 are very close to zero and provide strong evidence which supports the hypothesis that the components of size explain expected returns beyond what size explains itself. The size components play a complementary role in describing returns in the presence of size. Aforementioned implicates that including the size components in expected return models in addition to the size variable improves the explanatory power of the model. Outcomes of the cross-sectional tests suggest that the industry size premium cannot be entirely attributed to any individual size component: LMV, MOM, REV or ISS. Moreover, all four component portfolios are also characterized by significant averages of raw and risk-adjusted returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of local supersector indices (936 industries from 51 countries, including developed, emerging and frontier markets), which are interchangeably called industry indices. The supersector definition is based on the Industry Classification Benchmark (ICB) and covers 19 different industries: automobiles and parts, banks, basic resources, chemicals, construction and materials, financial services, food and beverage, health care, industrial goods and services, insurance, media, oil and gas, personal and household goods, real estate, retail, technology, telecommunications, travel and leisure, and utilities. The initial market data are collected in local currencies and are subsequently converted to U.S. dollars to obtain a pooled international sample. To ensure the consistency with the U.S. dollar approach, the proxy for the risk-free rate is the one-month Treasury bill rate sourced from Kenneth R. French’s data library. The long-short zero-investment factor portfolio is constructed. Portfolio components are weighted according to the de-meaned value of return predictive variables. For any industry index i = 1, . . . , N at time t with MV i at time t, industry indices are weighted in proportion to their cross-sectional rank based on the MV i at time t minus the cross-sectional average of MV (for every i= 1,…,N at time t), this difference is multiplied with a scaling factor such that the overall portfolio is scaled to one dollar long and one dollar short (equation can be found at page 14, equation 6). The weights across all indices sum to zero, forming a zero-investment long-short portfolio. The return on the factor portfolio MV is found as a sum through i=1,…, N of weights multiplicated by corresponding returns. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Small-cap stocks are not a good hedge/diversification during times of stress, they perform well after economic crises, but they perform really bad during times leading up to it (when they are often one of the most damaged market segment). Small industry premia and small country premia are fundamentally similar types of strategies and therefore also can’t be used as a good hedge/diversification of equity market risk.