Recently, a paper has been released, which studies trades immediately after the market open and immediately before the market close. Both types of trades influence the market and momentum trading strategies based on morning returns as well as reversal trading strategies based on afternoon returns to generate significant abnormal returns. Nowadays, trading has become concentrated in the first and last hours of the session; this period now makes up more than half of the entire day’s trading volume. Trading in the morning and in the afternoon is driven by different motivations and have different implications for future returns. Research has proved that monthly accumulated afternoon returns negatively predict next month´s returns and on the other hand, the monthly accumulated first 2-hour returns positively predict the next month returns. Liquidity traders trade to rebalance their portfolios and manage their inventories. Many investors may want to rebalance their portfolios before the market close because high costs are associated with holding a sub-optimal portfolio overnight.
Moreover, such liquidity-motivated trades cause temporary stock price changes that are subsequently reversed. Trades immediately before market close are mostly liquidity-driven and therefore will cause subsequent price reversals, which can be exploited in a profitable reversal trading strategy. An investor can also trade momentum strategy based on morning trades. However, due to higher significance, we decided to add only reversal strategy to our database.

Fundamental reason
The trading before the market close is mostly liquidity-driven. If an investor is not willing to hold a sub-optimal portfolio overnight, the portfolio must be rebalanced before market close. To provide liquidity to such investors, liquidity providers are willing to take the sub-optimal position in exchange for higher expected returns. As a result, prices are pushed away from their fundamental values before the market close. If such liquidity demand persists, asset prices will not correct immediately. Moreover, it was shown that some liquidity-driven price pressure might last a few months.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all domestic, primary stocks listed on the New York (NYSE), American (AMEX) and Nasdaq stock markets. Firstly, stocks with prices less than $5 or those in the smallest NYSE size decile are excluded. Sort stocks into three groups based on NYSE size deciles in each month, the rest nine size deciles are grouped into three subsamples: small, mid and large. Calculate intraday stock returns of the “large” subsample using intraday trading prices from the Trade and Quote (TAQ) database. Use the last trading price before 14:00 (P1) and the last trading price before 16:00 (P2). The intraday return is calculated as a P2 divided by P1 minus 1. Accumulate intraday returns respectively over the one-month period. Sorts stocks into deciles on the basis of prior monthly returns (accumulated intraday returns). Buy the losers (bottom decile) and sell the winners (top decile). The portfolio is rebalanced monthly and is equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.