The portfolio risk and return differ between periods of trading and nontrading. The stock market is more volatile over trading periods than it is over nontrading periods. The weekend effect, or the tendency of stock returns to be low over the weekend, is perhaps the most widely documented nontrading effect. The desire to close positions before the weekend would be most pronounced for short-sellers who were deterred by the unbounded downside risk inherent in their positions. The expiration weekends are associated with lower than normal levels of trading volume, as well as some unusual price behaviour in the underlying index. Therefore expiration weekends should have an even stronger impact on equity prices and derived option prices. Academic research by Jones and Shemesh shows that this expiration weekend effect can cause price drift over 1,5% (Friday’s option prices are much higher then they should be compared to Monday’s opening/closing prices). Options are known for the wide bid/ask spreads; therefore it may be hard to exploit entire offered abnormal return, however knowledge about this pattern can be used to create various strategies on more liquid instruments with a lower bid/ask spreads.

Fundamental reason
There are three possible explanations for the anomaly. The first is that nontrading returns are lower because of differential levels of risk between trading and nontrading periods. The second is that aversion to unbounded downside risk rises over nontrading periods. Since this risk is experienced by option writers but not buyers, option writers will require a higher risk premium to keep positions open. Since writers are short options, this means that option returns must be negative over the weekend. The last is that the nontrading effect is the result of widespread and highly persistent market mispricing. But as the main explanation appears to be an inefficiency of market whereby traders fail to adequately distinguish between trading and nontrading time when valuing options, resulting in rates of time decay that are inconsistent with asset pricing theory.

Simple trading strategy
The universe consists of all S&P 500 Index puts. Investor excludes the options that have less than 100 contracts traded in the last five days, which makes the portfolio more liquid. The investor sells put options on every expiration Friday (third Friday of the month), option portfolio is equally-weighted. He closes this position after the weekend (on Monday or the first trading day after the weekend).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy is selling equity options volatility (even that only for a very short period of time) therefore is not suitable as a hedge/diversification during market/economic crises.