Firms are economically linked to each other through various types of relations. Past research has looked at cross-firm return predictability among firms within the same industry, with similar technologies or similar geographic locations. This paper shows that comparing the credit rating of firms’ corporate bonds generates stock-return predictability and cannot be explained by any of the existing economic links. The authors state that companies whose bond ratings move similarly can positively predict each other’s stock returns. Information is moving between the bond and equity markets with lag, caused by the differences between the equity market and the corporate bond market and the slow reaction of investors, which causes cross-firm return predictability. Naturally, such a result can be the basis of the trading strategy. The simple strategy tells us to sort firms using credit-rating comovement into quintile portfolios, buy stocks in the top quintile, and sell stocks in the bottom quintile.

Fundamental reason
The first reason for the functionality of the strategy is the difference between the equity market and the corporate bond market. The credit ratings predict firms’ debt repayment ability and probability of default. On the other hand, equity analysts analyze the growth options of the firms. Therefore credit-rating comovement captures a unique perspective that differs from shared analyst coverage. Furthermore, this information is likely to be overlooked by equity analysts because of the segmentation between the bond market and the equity market. The analysts could be slow to react, which causes cross-firm return predictability in the equity market. However, the existence of investors who trade both stock and bonds of the same firm is required.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ-listed U.S. stocks. Stocks with prices below 1$ are excluded.Bond characteristics come from the Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database. Exclude bonds issued under Rule 144A, bonds that are not traded in USD, and bonds with special conditions (asset-backed securities, callables, convertibles, bonds with warrants, or with zero coupons).At first, compare corporate bond rating changes for every bond pair. If there exists comovement (they are upgraded or downgraded together) within a window of ±10 days at least three times in the past three years, the firms are economically connected (“linked bonds”). On a monthly basis, link each firm (“focal firm”) to a portfolio of firms (“peer firms”) based on this analysis. Secondly, at the end of each month, calculate the equal-weighted monthly stock returns (the sorting variable) for every focal firm from its peer firms. Finally, sort focal firms into quintile portfolios. Long the top quintile and short the bottom quintile. The strategy is value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - No explicit mention of profitability during bear markets.