Special events are one of the best sources of extraordinary returns. One such event is spin-off when a subsidiary of a large company separates itself from the parent company. The spun-off companies are expected to be worth more, as their independence offers better growth prospects. It is usually assumed those parent companies held spun-off companies down and transferred earings to fund other less perspective internal operations. Spin-offs’ independence could improve their performance. Academic research confirms that this theory is right, and trading strategy which invests in spin-off companies offers attractive returns.

Fundamental reason
The academic paper doesn’t offer a theoretical explanation for spinoff companies outperformance. Other academic sources usually explain this anomaly by diseconomies of scale. As the firm becomes more complex, the costs of decision management and decision control increase to the point where they may offset economies gained from increasing firm size. The equity values of the spinoffs provide a much “cleaner” signal of managerial productivity than when the two divisions were part of a combined firm.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stock from NYSE, Nasdaq and Amex. Investor observes market news and invests in each existing tax-free spinoff company while simultaneously shorts matched industry benchmark (by shorting ETF for example). All taxable and mixed taxation distributions, distributions classified as a return of capital and involuntary distributions are skipped. Portfolio of stocks is equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.