Trend following strategies have been used on Wall Street for a very long time. They offer systematic rules to filter unfavorable market conditions (and stay invested in safe assets like treasury bills) and show when to invest in risky assets (i.e., the broad equity market). Golden/Black Cross is a very well-known trend following indicator which uses two moving averages (a faster 50-day and a slower 200-day), and their intersection to show when to shift between assets. A volatility premium is a systematic risk premium that is possible to capture by selling options (because the implied volatility in option prices is usually higher than the realized volatility). Combining both effects gets better results than using them independently, as the Golden/Black Cross rule is able to effectively manage decisions to sell or buy options to gain exposure to a volatility premium.

Fundamental reason
A volatility premium is caused by investors who strongly dislike negative returns and high volatility on equity indices and are therefore willing to pay premiums for portfolio insurance offered by options. Combining this effect with a trend-following filter enhances the strategy’s risk/return characteristics as the investor uses two market states and adjusts the strategy (selling calls or puts) to each market state.

Simple trading strategy
The investor holds a 50% position in cash (3-month Treasury bills, could be traced via ETF) and a 50% position in the equity market (could be traced via ETF funds, futures, or any other instrument). He/she then calculate the 50- and 200-day simple moving average (SMA) of the S&P 500 Total Return (SPTR) Index at the end of each day. The market is in a bullish state if the 50-day SMA is over the 200-day SMA. The investor then rolls the 50% position (the number of option contracts makes its at-the-money face value equal to 50% of the portfolio value) into put options. The investor switches from puts to calls and rolls a 50% position in call options if the 50-day SMA is under the 200-day SMA (bear market).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Absolutely not a hedge, the investor owns a lot of equity risk, and he may try to time a volatility risk premium by selectively selling a put or call options. But it is still a fat-tail strategy which loses a lot of money during crisis periods…