The short ratio – shares shorted to shares outstanding – is an often-used ratio to show of arbitrageurs’ opinion about a stock’s over-valuation. However, recent academic research shows that better measure could be used to exploit information about equity short interest. Days to cover (a stock’s short ratio divided by its average daily share turnover) is prefered measure used by short sellers to assess how easily could be short position covered. Therefore stocks with a high measure of days to cover ratios should be stocks which are overvalued (as short-sellers are willing to carry high risk by shorting them). Academic research shows this is true, and long-short portfolio could be created to capture spread between stocks with high and low measures of DTC (days-to-cover) ratio. The academic paper shows a Sharpe ratio of up to 1.33 for the equally weighted portfolio; however, we added value-weighted portfolio into our database as it is less influenced by less liquid micro-cap and small-cap stocks.

Fundamental reason
Academic research postulates that days-to-cover is a widely monitored metric among short-sellers in practice as the short-sellers report that they prefer stocks where they are able to close or cover their positions quickly without having to account for a big part of the daily market volume. DTC is a measure of the ease with which they can achieve this goal. Arbitrageurs all else equal prefer to short a liquid name where it is easier to cover their positions. So stocks with high short interest may be easier to trade and not necessarily be extremely over-priced. When a stock’s DTC is high, arbitrageurs are sticking their necks out by bearing a high marginal cost and hence we can infer that they are convinced of that stock being over-priced.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ firms. Turnover is calculated as the daily ratio of the number of total shares traded to the number of total shares outstanding. The daily turnover ratio is averaged within a month to get a monthly variable. Each month for each stock, the days-to-cover (DTC) ratio is calculated as a stock’s short ratio divided by its average daily share turnover. At the end of each month, all the stocks are sorted into deciles based on days-to-cover, and a long-short portfolio is formed by buying the lowest decile and shorting the highest decile portfolio. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly, and stocks are value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.