Value investors take long (short) positions in companies they consider undervalued (overvalued). Determining the proper intrinsic value of a company is a cornerstone of value investing. Although the classic discounted cash flow (DCF) model is a general pathway to value a company, its practical implementation may be problematic. Projecting the future cash flows is inherently intricate, and the drivers of projections can differ for companies in various industries. These complications can lead to vast variations in the model’s usage when valuing different companies under the same DCF framework. Hu, Sy, and Wu (2020) address this shortcoming of the DCF model and propose a novel statistical factor model structure that allows systematic company relative value comparison across a large universe based on a long list of firm characteristics. Their factor model identifies misvalued companies via a crossectional contemporaneous regression of the company relative value on industry classification and the valuation factors. To demonstrate the model’s usage in practice, the authors sorted their investment universe into decile portfolios, where the first (tenth) decile consists of the most undervalued (overvalued) stocks. Consistent with the theory, the first decile (the most undervalued stocks) outperformed the tenth decile (the most overvalued stocks) by 11% on an annual basis. Accordingly, a systematic buying of the undervalued stocks and selling the overvalued stocks results in a profitable trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
The proposed cross-sectional factor model allows systematic company relative value comparison across a large universe. When the company’s relative value deviates from its fair valuation predicted by the model, value investors perceive the misvalue as an opportunity to earn abnormal returns. The regression residual from the model captures the residual variation of the company relative value that can’t be explained by the cross-sectional differences in the selected firm characteristics. Thus, the regression residual represents the company misvalue. The greater (smaller) absolute residual values reflect greater (smaller) company misvalue. A positive (negative) residual suggests that the company is overvalued (undervalued). The factor model explains, on average, 68% of the cross-sectional variation of the company relative value. Furthermore, the model’s explanatory power experiences only mild out-of-sample degeneration to an average R-squared of 65%, highlighting the robustness of the relative value factor structure.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all US publicly traded companies listed on AMEX, NYSE, and NASDAQ that have strictly positive total sales, both the total book equity and total asset no less than $100 million, and market capitalization no less than $200 million. Firstly, for each company, calculate the market value (MV) as MV = TA – BE + MC, where TA represents the company’s total assets, BE the book common equity, and MC the market capitalization. Then compute each company’s relative value ratio as q = ln(MV/TA). To capture the cross-sectional variation of company relative value, construct 23 descriptors of firm characteristics that fall into eight broad categories, namely, profitability, growth, investment, liquidity, leverage, market risk, size, and momentum. The list and the construction of descriptors can be found in section 2.2. Secondly, standardize the raw value of each descriptor by deducting the cross-sectional mean and dividing the demeaned value by the cross-sectional standard deviation (see equation 1). To mitigate the impacts of outliers, winsorize the raw values at 1%-99% percentiles, estimate the cross-sectional mean and standard deviation on the winsorized sample, and truncate the standardized value to be between [-2;2]. Thirdly, create the kth factor for each company by averaging the standardized descriptors of the company within the kth category (see equation 2). When there is only one descriptor in the category, the weight is naturally just one. When there are multiple descriptors, determine the weight on each descriptor via a Bayesian cross-sectional regression on the common sample (see equations 3, 4, and 5). Each month, run a regression of a company’s standardized relative value on a dummy variable classifying the company into the 49 industries based on the SIC classification as in Fama and French (1989) and the aforementioned valuation factors (see equation 6). Nextly, sort the companies according to their regression residual into the decile portfolios, where the first (tenth) decile contains companies with the lowest (highest) residual values. The trading rule for the strategy is as follows: each month, buy the first decile portfolio and sell the tenth decile portfolio. Weigh the portfolios equally and rebalance monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide any information regarding this topic.