There is a well-established impact of the oil prices on the broad economy. However, its effect on the cross-section of the stock returns is not as well understood. The key question is whether the high oil prices are good or bad for stock prices. Oil-producing ﬁrms clearly beneﬁt from high oil prices, but for ﬁrms that use oil as an input, high oil price translates into lower proﬁts. Clearly, among both oil producers and consumers, the proﬁts of individual ﬁrms have varying degrees of exposure to oil prices. If the stock market is efﬁcient, stock prices respond immediately to oil price changes that predict cash ﬂows. Although, novel research hypothesize, that limited investor attention leads only to slow incorporation of information about oil price changes into stock prices.

The main idea is that oil price changes predict variation in future earnings for individual stocks, but equity investors are too slow to incorporate this information. Paper argues that the quarterly earnings cycle dictates the slow spillover from oil prices into stock prices. Investors do not realize the implications of the oil price changes in one quarter until it is too late, or more precisely until ﬁrms start to announce quarterly earnings in the ﬁrst month of the following quarter. This can be exploited through the stock’s oil earnings surprise measure, which is the product of that stock’s oil earnings beta and the oil price change for that quarter. The trading strategy would buy stocks with high oil earnings surprises and short stocks with low oil earnings surprises.

Fundamental reason
The main fundamental reason is limited investor attention. This limited attention naturally leads to slow incorporation of information about oil price changes into stock prices. Simply said, the investors are too slow to include the information about the oil price in their decisions. Moreover, investors do not realize the implications of oil price changes in one quarter until ﬁrms start to announce quarterly earnings in the ﬁrst month of the following quarter. There is signiﬁcant cross-sectional equity return predictability due to variation in exposure to oil price changes.
Additionally, the paper has proved that by using double sorts, the strategy is independent of the 23 anomalies from Novy-Marx and Velikov. A lot of anomalies cannot be used in practice, because of the trading costs. But due to the strategy’s low portfolio turnover (trading strategy buys stocks with high oil earnings surprises and shorts stocks with low oil earnings surprises quarterly), the oil earnings surprise strategy also survives transaction costs.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks in the CRSP/COMPUSTAT database. Firstly, estimate the “oil earnings beta” for each stock at the end of each calendar quarter. For each quarter Q, estimate the oil earnings beta for stock i from the equation number 1 – a rolling regression using data from the last 12 quarters. Secondly, calculate the oil earnings surprise for stock i in quarter Q as the product of the stock’s oil earnings beta estimate and the most recent quarterly change in oil prices. Form quintile portfolios of stocks sorted on oil earnings surprise, long the top quintile and short the bottom quintile. Hold these portfolios during the following quarter; the strategy is value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.