Discussed paper presents possible applications of finding that if there is deviation from put-call parity, it can in certain cases predict future stock returns. Put-call parity violation is measured by volatility-spread (VS). Authors present unique approach to predict option returns from new robust factor they called the uncertainty of put-call parity violation (VVS), which is based on volatility of volatility-spread (VS). Strategy we built try to exploit novel principles of adjusting portfolio based on analysis which is utilizing negative and statistically significant relationships between VVS and delta-hedged options.

Fundamental reason
Systematic investigation on the relationship between the put-call parity violation and option returns has not been conducted. Volatility spread (VS) is the difference in implied volatility between call and put options on the same underlying equity, with the same strike price and expiration date. Volatility of volatility-spread (VVS) measures the standard deviation of VS. Returns of constructed portfolios are calculated from sum of delta-hedged call gains as from Equation(3) on page 7. According to the authors, VVS is primary driven because options are taken as proxies for short-sale constraints, informed trading (information asymmetry), the lottery-like features of underlying stocks, and lastly illiquidity of both underlying equity and derivative. Under imperfect hedging, option market makers hold large and risky net long (short) positions such that they buy (sell) options at discounted (premium) prices to compensate for the risks and costs of their positions. VSS serves as a measure of uncertainty in option pricing beyond the widely-known factors; and secondly, it determines the option return premiums as hedging costs through the market order imbalance. Paper claim that VS itself alone gives weak predictability for option return and VSS help predict it with greater precision.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks options. Option and equities data are collected from OptionMetrics and Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). Application of this strategy tries to capitalize on main finding that the delta-hedged equity option return decreases monotonically with the VVS. Investor calculates VS as the difference of 30 days at-the-money call implied volatility versus put implied volatility. VVS, then, is calculated as standard deviation of VS. Then, they sort option samples into quintiles based on VVS measures. Finally, construct long-short portfolio that goes short (long) positions in options with the highest (lowest) VVS. Portfolio is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -