Researchers have provided mixed results regarding the character of the relationship between cash holdings and stock returns. For instance, Palazzo (2012) states that riskier firms with higher expected returns should hold more cash in case their future cash flows run low. On the other hand, Ortiz-Molina and Phillips (2014) argue that high cash holding firms have less risky asset base, which results in lower expected returns. Present study of Ang et.al (2019) examines the association between cash holdings and future stock returns and empirically confirms the existence of a positive relationship. To check the robustness of the anomaly, they use portfolio and regression analysis. Results indicate that the relationship is positive and robust to the adjustment of risk, the construction of cash holdings portfolios, the weighting scheme of portfolio returns, and the control of industry effects. Authors furthermore investigate what explains this relationship and as they show, cash holding effect seems to be a demonstration of accruals-based effects, rather than a new asset-pricing anomaly. In summary, it only exists in firms with low net operating assets and is driven by low NOAs among high cash holding firms. According to the findings, high cash holding firms with low NOAs significantly outperform low cash holding firms with high NOAs.

Fundamental reason
As the results show, cash holding effect cannot be fully clarified by risk-based explanations. More likely, it is connected to accruals-related anomalies, to mispricing and limits to arbitrage. Cash holding effect seems to exist among high cash holding firms with lower net operating assets (NOAs). As limited attention story suggests, investors are inclined to focus on accounting profitability and to neglect cash profitability, to which NOAs are negatively related. Low-NOAs firms that have poorly reported accounting performance in the past cause pessimism among investors. That is why they tend to be undervalued and therefore earn high average returns after undervaluation is corrected. Cash holding effect is thus a manifestation of behavioral story, particularly NOAs effect, a well-known pattern in the cross-section of stock returns.

Simple trading strategy
The dataset consists of all of the firms listed on the NYSE, Amex, and NASDAQ. Firms’ annual financial statements are sourced from Compustat. Monthly stock information come from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). As for firm characteristics, cash holdings is the proportion of total assets that the firm holds in cash and cash equivalents. Net operating assets are calculated as a difference between operating assets and liabilities at the end of fiscal year t, scaled by lagged total assets. Monthly stock returns from July of calendar year t+1 to June of calendar year t+2 are matched to financial statements for fiscal year t. Sort portfolios by cash holdings into deciles and by net operating asset into terciles. Go long high cash holding firms with low NOAs a short low cash holding firms with high NOAs. Portfolio is equally weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -