Performance reversal for stocks on short-term horizons (up to 1 month) is a well-known market anomaly with a reliable academic confirmation. One way to enhance profits on a short-term reversal anomaly is to reduce the investment universe from the whole stock market to separate industries. Intra-industry reversal then becomes a more robust and statistically significant strategy.

Fundamental reason
Academics speculate that the fundamental reason for the anomaly is investors’ overreaction to past information and the correction of that reaction after a short time horizon. Stocks in the same industry are also likely to be exposed to similar changes in the supply and demand for their products and services and macroeconomic, technological, and regulatory shocks. Hence, they share common sources for fundamental return correlations, and this industry membership should strengthen the return reversal.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of US stocks and excludes stocks with a price of less than $3. The stocks are divided into 24 industries. At the end of each month, the top (winner) and bottom (loser) 20 percent of the stocks are identified based on their returns in that month. The contrarian strategy involves buying the equal-weight portfolio of loser stocks and selling the equal-weight portfolio of the winner stocks from industry and repeated in each industry.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Equity reversal strategies are usually type of “liquidity providing” strategies, and as such, they typically perform well during market crises. However, reversal strategies are also naturally a “short volatility” strategies. Their returns increase mainly in the weeks following large stock market declines. Traders must be cautious during crises during days with high volatility as reversal strategies usually force traders to buy stocks which performed especially bad (and to sell short stocks with an extremely positive short term performance). This position is emotionally hard to open, and risk management of reversal strategies must also be rigorous during these days. We recommend reading the research paper by Nagel: “Evaporating Liquidity” to gain insight into the behavior of reversal strategies during crises.