The short-term reversal effect is one of the most established factors in financial markets. The short-term reversal is a tendency of stocks with a high or low return in the previous month to underperform or overperform in the following month. Although this anomaly has been known for thirty years, there still is not a clear consensus regarding its source. On the other hand, the long term momentum effect is most frequently measured based on the trailing 12-month period with the most recent month skipped. The investors are skipping the last month, but the short-term reversal effect may not be as prevalent as is usually thought and moreover, that last month could be special.

The growing amount of literature states that the most recent month is not connected with the reversal, but rather that the last month’s performance seems to predict the future payoffs positively. To sum it up, the short-term reversal may be a far less pervasive anomaly than is commonly believed by both practitioners and academics, and surprisingly, the dominant pattern is the short-term one-month momentum. In the world of equities, research on the return predictability based on the last month’s return was conducted on individual equities with a finding that the individual stocks exhibit short-term reversals. However, in the universe of equity country indices, the last month’s payoffs significantly predict future cross-sectional returns, and this could be exploited in the investing strategy.

Fundamental reason
Research has concluded that the last month’s payoffs significantly predict future cross-sectional returns in the universes of equities, bonds, bills, commodities, currencies and also in a pooled sample of all the asset classes. Moreover, the short-run momentum is an independent phenomenon, and this momentum is not explained by broadly acknowledged cross-asset return predictive variables. Interestingly, it is not subsumed by the traditional long term 12-month momentum, and it also remains significant after controlling for the market beta, idiosyncratic volatility, value, skewness or seasonality. Therefore, the short-term momentum in equities, bonds, currencies and commodities provides incremental information about future returns beyond the role of aforementioned performance predictors. The short-run momentum strategies in equities, bonds, bills even display some commonality, where the short-term momentum returns in these asset universes are weakly, yet significantly, correlated to each other. This result suggests that there could be a potential existence of some common factor partly contributing to the development of the short-run momentum effect across asset classes. However, the true reason for the functionality of the short-term momentum is still a mystery. However, results of the paper survive a battery of robustness checks, such as subperiod analysis, performance in different market states and calendar months, alternative implementation techniques, and alternative datasets.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of GFD USD Stock Return indices representing total returns on 45 different equity markets, encompassing developed, emerging and frontier countries (the full list is in the paper, page 8). Firstly, sort the assets in the sample into quintiles by their past month return. Long the quintile of assets with the highest returns in the previous month and short assets with the lowest returns. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Futures trend-following/momentum strategies are a cornerstone of trend-following CTA funds and as such are excellent candidates for an uncorrelated strategy and very often a hedge to equity market factor. The source research paper doesn’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; however, we can expect that strategy will probably retain a negative correlation to equities. Backtest would be helpful to determine correlation and hedging characteristics.