Low realized beta implies a future high return, while a high realized beta implies a future low return. This strategy – known as betting against beta (BAB) is well known and functioning. However, a portfolio which includes assets with low realized alphas or in other words, overpriced according to the CAPM model, has higher Sharpe ratio, future alphas and expected returns than a portfolio which includes assets with high-realized alphas or in other words, underpriced according to the CAPM model. Moreover, the low-alpha anomaly captures diﬀerent information about the cross-section of stock returns than the low-beta, and low-volatility anomalies do. The profitable strategy called Betting against alpha (BAA) based on this new anomaly is a zero-net investment strategy with leverage that longs portfolios with low-alpha stocks and shorts portfolios with high-alpha stocks. BAA factor is constructed using alphas estimated from the simple CAPM model using the past five years of data. However, the alternative models to the CAPM can also be used to estimate alpha too. Additionally, the performance of the BAA factor can be signiﬁcantly improved when the BAA factor is combined with the BAB factor. Buying a portfolio with assets having low realized alphas from the set of assets with low realized betas, and on the other hand, selling a portfolio with assets having high realized alphas from the set of assets with high realized betas leads to the strategy with much higher Sharpe ratios than those of the BAA or BAB factors alone (more information about this combined strategy can be found in the paper, for comparison, the monthly performance for big stocks is 0,82% for BAA factor and 0,91% for BAAB factor).

Fundamental reason
Leverage constrained investors to bid up high market-beta assets, so consequently, the high market-beta stocks are overpriced relative to the low Market-beta stocks. Moreover, the leverage constrained investors can bid upon any of the non-market factors betas for the same reason why they bid up on the market betas. Buying the assets with a high beta corresponding to a factor other than the CAPM’s Market factor (or any model that does not capture all sources of risk) is the same as buying an asset with a positive CAPM’s alpha. Research proved that investors are mostly concerned about market risk and treat the non-market risk factors as alphas. Fund ﬂows are responding positively to the size of the CAPM alpha, and this should be a motivation for fund managers to tilt their portfolios toward the assets with high non-market factor betas since that will be interpreted as a superior performance by investors interested mostly in the market risk. The literature about benchmarking and the limits to arbitrage say those fund managers with an explicit mandate to maximize the information ratio relative to a speciﬁc index are motivated to tilt their portfolios towards high beta assets. The numerator of the information ratio is dependent on the alpha generated by a portfolio relative to some index. For the assets with similar market betas and similar impact on the tracking error, for example, those with higher CAPM alphas, this will increase the numerator of the IR while keeping its denominator relatively constant. Lastly, this novel strategy could be seen as a contradictory to the previously published strategy (#353 – US Sector Rotation with Five-Factor Fama-French Alphas), which buys stocks with large alpha and sells those with low alpha. However, there is a big difference between the lookback and holding period. Sector rotation strategy uses 36 months lookback period and one month holding period, while betting against alpha strategy is built up with much longer periods (5 years lookback period and a year-long holding period).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks traded on the NYSE, NASDAQ, and AMEX, excluding REITs and ADRs.

Firstly, use NYSE breakpoints to create three sets of data: Small containing all firms with a market cap equal to or below the 30th percentile, Medium containing all firms with a market cap greater than the 30th percentile and lower than or equal to the 70th percentile and Big containing those firms with a market cap value greater than the 70th percentile. From now on, only the Big data set is used.

Secondly, both betas and alphas are estimated at the end of December with OLS regressions using the CAPM model and while using the past five years of data. Find the median alpha and sell a portfolio containing assets with realized alpha bigger than the median alpha and long the portfolio of assets with realized alphas lower than the median alpha. The portfolio is rebalanced yearly.

The methodology for weights is the same for BAA, BAB and BAAB factors; however, the author claims that the purpose of the paper was not to find the strategy with the best Sharpe ratio. For every asset i, alpha i is equal to the correlation coefficient between asset’s i returns and the Market returns multiplied by the estimated asset i volatility and divided by the estimated Market volatility. The correlation is estimated using ﬁve years data, while volatilities are estimated using yearly data. The ﬁnal market alpha assigned to an asset i is equal to the alpha i multiplied by 0,6 plus 0,4. Let nl be the number of assets in the low alpha portfolio, and zl be the nl ×1 vector of alpha ranks. The weight of an asset i in the low alpha portfolio is equal to the nl minus zl for i plus 1 divided by the sum of zl for every i. Let nh be the number of assets in the high alpha portfolio, and zh be the nh×1 vector of alpha ranks. The weight of an asset i in the high alpha portfolio is equal to the zh for every i divided by the sum of zh i for every i. The sum of the weights is equal to the 1 for both low and high portfolios. The ﬁnal weighted market alpha of the low and high alpha portfolios are: alpha low which is equal to the sum for every i of wl i multiplied by the market alpha i and alpha high which is equal to the sum for every i of the wh i multiplied by the market alpha i.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Based on the source research paper (see for example table 3), the strategy has a strongly positive correlation to market factor therefore probably can’t be used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets.