Multiple research papers suggest that options trading has an impact on the future movement of stock prices. One of the recent studies in this area examined the predictive power of unsigned OTM option trading volume on future stock returns. The main conclusion is that higher OTM call (put) options trading volume relative to total OTM trading volume predict positive (negative) future stock returns on both a daily and weekly basis. This information then served as a basis for a proposed long-short investment strategy, which sorts stocks into deciles based on the OTMPC ratio – the ratio of OTM put trading volume to total OTM option trading volume. Going long on the bottom decile (the lowest relative OTM put trading volume) and short on the top decile resulted in an annualized average return of 10.4% (for value-weighted portfolio). Furthermore, the value-weighted portfolio generated a higher return than the equal-weighted, which means that the anomaly tends to be stronger on large-cap stocks.

Fundamental reason
Different papers on this topic differ in opinion on what is the fundamental reason for the phenomenon. One of the most commonly stated reasons is informed options trading, where informed traders can exploit their information advantage better on equity options markets than on stock markets as such due to several benefits arising from options trading—this trading information than translates into stock prices. According to the authors, however, the fundamental reason, in this case, is that OTM option trading volumes predict the occurrence of material, corporate events, such as M&A / takeover announcement, or earnings surprise.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks with OTM options data at the IvyDB OptionMetrics database (further sample adjustments are described on page 6). Stock prices are obtained from the CRSP database. An investor sorts stocks based on their monthy OTMPC ratio (see page 16 for a formula, formula (7)) into deciles and then buys the bottom decile (the lowest relative OTM put trading volume) while selling the top decile. The portfolio is value-weighted and is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.