Over the past years, the China commodity futures market has become increasingly important. Currently, the four largest metals and agricultural futures markets in the world are located in China. Despite the fact that the time-series momentum has been widely studied by market practitioners and academic scholars on various markets, the China commodity market has been left moreless unnoticed.
Now, a recent research paper from Muzhao Jin et al. (2019) focuses on intraday time-series momentum in four Chinese commodity futures contracts: copper, steel rebar, soybean and soybean meal. Regressing the rest-of-day return on the first 30-minutes return of trading session, the researchers found, that first half-hour return significantly predicts the return for the rest of the trading day across all four commodity futures markets. Based on their findings, they propose following trading strategy: If the return of particular commodity future is positive during the first 30 minutes of trading session, then we go long for the rest of trading day, if it is negative, we go short. A trading strategy, which equally-weights the capital among these four commodity futures contracts would earn investor an annual return of 11,92%.
Further findings show, that for metals futures, the opening trading sessions with the highest volume or volatility have the greatest intraday time-series momentum predictability. However, the researchers didn’t find the this phenomenon for agricultural futures, with one possible explanation being the high proportion of noise traders active in the market.

Fundamental reason
Primarily, the paper has examined, whether the first half-hour return predicts the last half-hour return. The possible explanation could be found in the liquidity provision of intraday traders. Each day, a large amount of information collected during off-trading hours is reflected in the market during the opening period. This motivates day traders to provide liquidity at this time by taking the opposite side of the trades. These liquidity day traders then close their position during the rest of the day to avoid overnight risk. Thus, if informed traders bid prices up (down) during the opening 30 minutes, the liquidity providers collectively must take the opposite side and go net short (long). Later on, when the liquidity providers cover these positions, prices rise (fall) as a result.
Additionally, by regressing the rest-of-day return on the first trading session, it was shown, that the first 30-minute return can predict the rest-of-day return for all contracts. Slopes which were estimated are higher than those estimated when predicting the last 30-minute return. The authors report lower t-statistics for the rest-of-day slopes, but comparing t-statistics can be tricky, especially when assumptions of the linear regression required to obtain meaningful t-statistics are breached. We have some doubts about the correctness of the t-statistics usage in this case and consider the rest-of-day strategy as the better one.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of copper, steel rebar, soybean and soybean meal futures on the Chinese market. If the return of a particular commodity future is positive during the first 30 minutes of the trading session, then we go long for the rest of trading day, if it is negative, we go short. The paper rolled futures as follows (a similar approach to Fricke and Menkhoff (2011)): use the price series of maturity month with the highest trading volume and if a contract with a later maturity is used, the earlier maturity contract cannot be used again. Therefore, in practice, futures with the highest trading volume should be used. Lastly, the paper does not provide information about volatility, but the average win rate is from 50.75% to 53.25% (based on the type of commodity).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide any information about hedging properties of the strategy.