Fund managers who lag behind the benchmark in the first half of the year are more willing to boost the riskiness of their portfolio to make up by the end of the year. According to novel research, underperforming funds’ risk-shifting behavior significantly influences altering the risk-return trade-off by exerting higher pressure on the pricing of riskier equities.
The authors look into the well-known anomalies of overvaluation of high beta equities, idiosyncratic volatility, and skewness concerning stocks owned by lagging funds in greater depth. Guercio and Tkac (2008) give compelling evidence that ratings provided by intermediaries such as Morningstar have an important effect. Morningstar updated its rating process in June 2002, and instead of just aggregating and ranking all funds together, it began issuing ratings depending on how funds perform within their category. Most funds’ relevant peer groups shifted as a result of the change in technique, and they now compete primarily with other funds pursuing a similar objective. The funds are divided into groups based on a mix of value/growth metrics, market capitalization, and are typically share a style-specific benchmark. The fund managers then behave on behalf of these ratings and invest in risky stocks which are highly overpriced. To conclude, the anomalies are significant only when compared against the S&P 500 index before 2002 and the corresponding category index after 2002.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the logic behind fund managers’ behavior. The funds that obtained abysmal ratings using the Morningstar rating technique resulted from declining performance. Consequently, the fund managers panic and start investing in highly risky stocks. High idiosyncratic volatility equities will appeal to these lagging funds looking to get their fund back on track since their prices fluctuate more than the one with benchmark returns on average. Underperforming funds’ demand would subsequently contribute to overpricing of equities with significant idiosyncratic volatility. The result of this process is a more robust idiosyncratic volatility anomaly.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all AMEX, NYSE, and NASDAQ stocks with share codes 10 and 11. Monthly stock returns are obtained from the Center for Research in Security Price (CRSP). Stocks with prices below 5$ are excluded. The first variable of interest is the stock-level fund performance, which is defined as the weighted average of the year-to-date excess returns (relative to the benchmark index) of funds that hold the stock. However, due to a change of the Morningstar rating method, use the S&P 500 index as the benchmark before June 2002 and the Russell index as the benchmark after June 2002. The second variable of the interest is idiosyncratic volatility (IVOL), which is defined as the standard deviation of the residuals from the regression of the most recent month’s daily returns on the Fama-French three factors. Each month, stocks are sorted into quintile portfolios based on the stock-level fund performance. Then, in the lowest fund-performance quintile portfolio, sort stocks into ten decile portfolios based on IVOL. Long the bottom decile (stocks with the highest IVOL) and short the top decile (stocks with the lowest IVOL). The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Quantpedia notes: To us, it seems, that it’s best to select the highest fund-performance quintile portfolio instead of lowest quintile portfolio.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The strategy goes long (short) the low (high) volatility stocks but does not explicitly state whether it is enough to perform well during crises.