Commitments of traders report (COT report) is report periodically published by Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and it shows details about positions of three types of traders – large speculators, large hedgers, and small traders. Traders for a long time used this report as a guide for their decision making, and academics also started to seriously consider this report as a measure of investor sentiment for different groups of market participants. Academic research shows that large speculator sentiment forecasts price continuations and large hedger sentiment predicts price reversals; therefore, a successful trading system based on these sentiment indicators could be implemented.

Fundamental reason
Academic research suggests that hedgers tend to pay a risk premium to speculators in order to transfer nonmarketable risks – this is consistent with hedging-pressure theory. Futures risk premiums are correlated with hedgers’ net positions; therefore, contrarian signals provided by hedger sentiment roughly reflect hedging-pressure effects in futures markets. Speculators sentiment forecasts price continuations because large speculators in these markets earn returns for the bearing of risk.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe is made up of 6 agricultural commodity futures contracts: corn, soybeans, soy meal, wheat, cotton, and world sugar. A sentiment indicator for each agricultural commodity and two types of market participants (hedgers and speculators) are created each week as a result of the aggregate position (long open interest less short open interest) minus the minimum historical aggregate position in three years divided by the difference between the maximum and minimum historical aggregate position in three years.
The investor goes long commodities in which speculator sentiment is extremely bullish (in the top 20% of the historical sentiment index), and hedger sentiment is simultaneously extremely bearish (in the bottom 20% of the historical sentiment index). The investor goes short commodities in which speculator sentiment is hugely bearish (in the bottom 20% of the historical sentiment index), and hedger sentiment is simultaneously extremely bullish (in the top 20% of the historical sentiment index). The sentiment index is checked every week, and long or short positions in commodity futures are held for four weeks if conditions are fulfilled.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. Commodities usually have a negative correlation to equities; therefore proposed strategy can be negatively correlated too, but a rigorous backtest is needed to asses if this is the case …