According to the author, there is a significant negative relationship between the net gamma exposure in the equity option market and future stock returns. Option market makers need to purchase shares on the market to hedge themselves to remain delta-neutral. Such hedging behavior can have a large impact on asset prices. The gamma premium is found to be significantly more negative during economic downturns and periods of high financial uncertainty, compared to non-recessionary periods, and net gamma exposure also negatively predicts future volatility. Authors’ contribution is incredibly also valuable in recent times when trading of options is getting significant attention nowadays, especially from retail investors.

Fundamental reason
The relation between the net gamma exposure and the cross-section of expected returns is well documented in previous literature. Amar Soebhag (September, 2022) builds on it, and his research points enrich it by conducting the robustness tests of their findings. How aggressively option market makers need to trade stocks to remain delta-neutral depends on the option’s gamma. Gamma measures how much an option’s price accelerates when the underlying security price changes. The working hypothesis is that stocks with negative hedging pressure can exacerbate stock volatility. In contrast, positive hedging pressure acts as a volatility dampener, and it can be accepted and taken as the basis for forming various systematic strategies for option market makers. Trading on private information has not been proven to have any effect on this phenomeon, but instead, hedge re-balancing explains why net gamma exposure is negatively related to future volatility.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of: stocks trading on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), American Stock Exchange (AMEX), and National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation (NASDAQ). (Derivatives’ data are obtained from OptionMetrics.) We calculate the net gamma exposure (Γ) of the stocks as the gamma-weighted sum of open interest across the options written on that one particular stock (as shown on equation (1)). In our particular implementation, Γ is measured with a 1-day implementation lag. Next, at the end of month t we sort stocks into ten portfolios based on their Γ, and hold self-financing high-minus-low portfolio, which is constructed as the (final) difference portfolio going long (buying) stocks from highest H (top tier) and going short (selling [short]) those ones from the lowest (bottom tier) portfolio L portfolio during month t + 1. Portfolio is rebalanced monthly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -