It is a well-known fact that corporate earnings news and earnings announcements significantly impact stock prices not only around, but also after the announcements. Past research has documented an anomaly known as post-earning-announcement drift, where stock prices continue to drift in the direction of earnings news for a long period after the earnings announcement. Although the information may be already available, investors may not react immediately, and the new information would be incorporated in the stock’s price later. Novel research develops a new measure to directly capture the degree of initial market response to an earnings announcement. Moreover, the paper provides direct evidence that initial market response is associated with the magnitude of post-earnings-announcement drifts, contingent on the signs of earnings surprises and earnings announcement abnormal returns.

The measure – the earnings response elasticity (ERE), directly capture the degree of initial market reaction to earnings surprises. This ratio (ERE) is an elasticity measure – the percentage change in stock prices that occurs in response to a one percent change in earnings surprises. The numerator (earnings announcement abnormal returns or EAAR) of the ERE captures the market reaction to all the information released around the company’s earnings announcement date. At the same time, the denominator of the ERE gives special emphasis to the earnings surprise. Naturally, the more muted the initial market response to earnings news, the larger the magnitude of the subsequent stock price movement. Therefore, the ERE can be utilized in a trading strategy because the low ERE firms have larger post-earnings announcement drifts. A profitable strategy using ERE consists of a long position in firms in the lowest ERE quintile when both earnings surprises and EAARs are positive and of a short position when both are negative.

Fundamental reason
Returns of this strategy can be attributed to the initial underreaction to the new information from the earnings announcements. As a result of underreaction, the information would be incorporated into prices of stocks with a delay. Therefore by identifying such stocks and identifying whether the information is positive or negative (to identify the direction of the upcoming stock’s price change), one should easily earn abnormal returns. To sum it up, firms in the lower ERE quintiles have relatively larger drifts post earnings announcements. Paper also offers a possible explanation of why the low ERE stocks receive such small attention. Firstly, firms in the bottom ERE quintile are in general smaller and have higher book-to-market equity ratios than firms in the top ERE quintile. Small stocks and stocks with higher BM ratios usually draw fewer media and investor attention than large stocks.
Moreover, stocks with lower BM ratios are typically followed by fewer financial analysts. Secondly, limited attention paid to firms in the lowest ERE quintiles, which are smaller and less glamorous may cause investors to ignore useful information, which leads to stock price underreaction. If investors pay less attention to a company’s stock, they are more likely to ignore the company’s earnings announcements and therefore are unable to incorporate the earnings news into prices instantaneously. Last but not least, from a practical point of view, the strategy remains significant even if the transaction costs are included.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE stocks. Firstly, calculate the earnings response elasticity (ERE) for every stock i in quarter q as an absolute value of abnormal return for firm i in quarter q recorded over a three-day window (EAAR) centred on the earnings announcement date divided by the accounting earnings surprise for firm i in quarter q (equations on page 8). Nextly, sort the stocks to quintiles by their ERE. Take a long position in firms in the bottom ERE quintile when both earnings surprises and EAARs are positive and a short position in firms in the ERE1 quintile when both are negative. The stock is held to the next quarter and strategy is rebalanced daily (because of various earnings announcement dates).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.