The research project we review develops a Constant Leverage covering strategy that depends only on past information and accounts for transaction costs at the individual stock level. One of its most important features is that if the proxy is smaller than the target, it behaves exactly like the momentum portfolio. Mario Enrique Negrete (2023) uses a ten-year rolling window to find the volatility threshold at which the loser portfolio volatility is likely to predict the start of a financial crisis that will end when the momentum portfolio crashes. The momentum crashes stylized facts documented in this paper could be used to develop new asset pricing models, and we select the Constant Leverage (CLvg) covering strategy to enrich our database.

Fundamental reason
The most important contribution of the momentum returns literature has been to display the empirical limitations of the EMH. Information stored in past monthly returns can be used to generate portfolios that outperform the stock market while having higher Sharpe ratios. Furthermore, covering strategies have shown that it is possible to use information stored in past daily returns to increase further the expected returns and Sharpe ratios of momentum portfolios. However, the credibility of these findings has been questioned because researchers have depended on forward-looking biases to construct covering strategies and have disregarded transaction costs. Furthermore, to compensate for their mistakes, these strategies depend on deforming the momentum portfolio even in periods that do not present crashes. The covering strategies deform the momentum portfolio using unrealistically increasing leverage. Researchers have studied the EMH and financial anomalies, but there has been little interest in developing models that merge the findings of both literatures. The momentum anomaly states only that the first and tenth deciles do not behave like the EMH, but it does not contradict the EMH in the other deciles. The momentum anomaly might be the bridge to bring the two pieces of literature together. The main contribution of this project is a deeper understanding of the empirical regularities surrounding momentum crashes. The future is unpredictable, and no one knows when a stock market sell-off will start or end. However, these periods of financial turmoil are marked by high volatility in the loser portfolio. These periods are predictable because the loser portfolio volatility presents high volatility persistence and volatility clusters.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe contains stocks for all U.S. markets, i.e., the common shares listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ, and one-month treasury bills (also may be in the form of ETF, for example, BIL: SPDR® Bloomberg 1-3 Month T-Bill ETF).
(The data comes from the CRSP.)

Rationale: CLvg uses the previous month’s value of the 126-day RVol of the loser portfolio as a proxy. So, first, decide the rule for CLvg as described in Equation 7. The CLvg depends only on past information and has a simple structure: when the forecasted volatility is low, it holds the momentum portfolio. When the forecasted volatility is high, it holds one-month treasury bills.

The algorithm used to construct the momentum portfolio has three stages:
1. the formation or ranking period: Stocks are ranked by their individual returns over the past twelve months and classified into deciles. Each decile will become a portfolio.
2. the skipping stage: This stage skips one month after the formation period to avoid short-term price reversals before the holding period.
3. the holding stage: The momentum portfolio is formed by buying the highest decile (winner portfolio) and selling the lowest decile (loser portfolio) for one month.

The strategy requires monthly rebalancing (rebalance each month) and value-weighting.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The whole paper presents a lot about avoiding turmoil during financial-related mayhems; E.g., The CVol successfully predicted the momentum crashes that happened after the dot-com bubble, the Great Recession of 2008, and the COVID-19 crisis. The CVol presented fewer extreme losses than the momentum portfolio (Figure 9) because its weight was smaller than one. The CLvg eliminated its exposure to the momentum portfolio during the highly volatile periods following the dot-com bubble, the Great Recession of 2008, and the COVID-19 crisis. Instead, the CLvg bought one-month treasury bills during these volatile periods (as represented by the flat line in panels b, c, and d of Figure 10). The loser portfolio volatility is likely to predict the start of a financial crisis that will end when the momentum portfolio crashes.

