Short-term reversal strategy, i.e. buying past losers and selling past winners, is already well-documented in academic literature. A recent contribution to reversal-related literature examines the impact of different trading conditions during market closures on returns of various asset classes: international stocks (similar to strategy no. 97) and futures (equity, interest rate, commodity and currency). Among other things, the author found that the reversal strategy which weights assets based on their past overnight returns (close-to-open) and invests intraday (open-to-close; therefore the author also calls this strategy CO-OC) significantly outperforms the standard close-to-close (CC-CC) reversal strategy, regardless of asset class (stocks, equity futures, interest rate futures, commodity futures and currency futures) or trading frequency (daily or weekly). For daily CO-OC reversal, we will further describe the strategy on commodities. While all assets classes recorded such positive performance, the high trading frequency might have a significant impact on real performance due to trading costs and slippage.

Fundamental reason
In general, the reversal in the price of an asset occurs due to investors’ overreaction to asset-related news and the subsequent price correction. Periodic market closures (overnight and weekends) are typically characterized by low trading activity and liquidity. Based on the findings by Nagel (2012), the author found that the overnight increment of the uncertainty (as measured by VIX index) plays an important role in explaining profits of CO-OC reversal strategy (the results were stronger in futures than in stocks). Furthermore, the CO-OC reversal pattern is consistent with the continuous-time model with periodic market closures by Hong and Wang (2000), whereby hedging demands seem to induce CO-OC reversals.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 11 commodity futures, whose open and close prices are available at TickData database, namely: Corn, Ethanol CBOT, Lean Hogs, Live Cattle, Lumber, Oats, Pork Bellies, Rough Rice, Soybean Meal, Soybeans, and Wheat CBOT. Most liquid contracts (nearest-to-delivery) are picked. The investor constructs a zero-investment portfolio, buying past overnight losers and selling past overnight winners, where weights of individual commodities are calculated using the formulas (1) and (4) on page 8 and 9 of the paper. We then use only 1/2 of weight from source academic paper to estimate portfolio return and volatility as calculated weights from source paper show excessive 60% yearly volatility of trading strategy. The trading period is the following open-to-close after formation period (close-open). The portfolio is rebalanced daily.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. Commodities usually have a negative correlation to equities; therefore proposed strategy can be negatively correlated too, but rigorous backtest is needed to asses if this is the case …

