The derivatives such as options and leveraged ETFs are commonly known to be valued based on the value of the underlying assets. But do they affect the market prices of underlying assets? The novel research shows that both options and leveraged ETFs affect the underlying stocks, especially during a short period before the close. Market makers active in the options markets do not want any directional exposure, and therefore, they need to hedge their positions to be delta-neutral. However, the delta-hedging is not a one-time “thing” and needs to be continually adjusted since the price movement of the underlying changes the delta. The research shows that based on market makers’ aggregate gamma (negative or positive), there could be either momentum or reversal effect at the end of the day. To summarize, there tends to be a predictable price pressure caused by gamma hedging pressure.
Additionally, the authors also identify leveraged ETFs rebalancing pressure caused by predictable mechanical rebalancing. The reason is that the price movements affect the required notional values of swaps utilized in leveraged ETFs. As a result, the swap counterparty must manage exposure to the underlying ETF, which can induce a large rebalancing of physical assets.
Both effects can be used in a trading strategy, where the trader can time the market based on hedging pressure by buying stocks with the lowest hedging pressure and shorting stocks with the highest hedging pressure or by going long stocks with the highest rebalancing pressure and short stocks with lowest rebalancing pressure. The second effect seems stronger, but these two effects can be combined for a composite strategy that performs even better than each building block. Furthermore, these market timing strategies trade only half an hour before the market closes when the positions are closed.

Fundamental reason
The fundamental reason is the predictable price pressure caused by mechanic rebalancing or hedging a short time before the market closes. Both option market makers and leveraged ETFs contribute to these predictable pressures. Option market makers influence the prices through delta-hedging of their portfolios. For example, if there is a positive price jump and the gamma of the market maker is initially negative, the delta changes, and staying delta-neutral requires buying additional shares of the underlying stock, thus creating a positive price pressure. Conversely, if the initial gamma is negative, the market maker needs to sell underlying shares – causing a negative price pressure. Leveraged ETFs cause predictable price pressures because of the rebalancing. Since the leveraged ETFs are synthetic instruments, these ETFs are composed of total return swaps. The notional principal of these swaps is equal to the multiple of the reference portfolio. The price jump of the underlying stock portfolio increases both the reference portfolio and the required notional value of the swap. Therefore, price appreciation or depreciation causes an imbalance between the swap’s required and effective notional amount. The swap counterparty must manage exposure to the underlying ETF which can induce large rebalacning of physical assets.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of US stocks with CRSP share code 10 and 11, and exchange code 1, 2, 3, 31, 32, and 33. Additionally, the stocks in the investment universe must be constituents of leveraged ETFs, and the stocks must have option data to calculate gamma hedging pressure. The data are sourced by CRSP, ETFGlobal, CBOE, GEMX, ISE, NOBO, PHLX, and TAQ. As a first step, calculate the gamma hedging pressure and leveraged ETF rebalancing pressure. The gamma hedging pressure is equal to the aggregated gamma imbalance multiplied by the return from the close of the previous day to the start of the hedging window at 15:30 multiplied by 100. The aggregated gamma imbalance is calculated as the total dollar gamma imbalance for a given stock at day t multiplied by the stock price at the close of the previous day divided by 100 and scaled by the average dollar volume in the last half hour of a trading day that is computed over the last month (for the mathematical parameterization, see equation 4). The demand pressure from the rebalancing of leveraged ETFs for each stock is calculated as the sum for each ETF that has that stock as a constituent. The sum consists of leverage multiplied by leverage minus one multiplied by asset under management of leveraged ETF at the previous day multiplied by a weight of the stock in the ETF multiplied by return on the benchmark ETF up until 15:30 scaled by the average dollar volume in the last half hour (see equation 6). Each day at 15:30, stocks are ranked based on their gamma hedging pressure (use reverse ranking for gamma pressure – lower numbers have higher ranks) and leveraged ETF rebalancing pressure. Sum the individual ranks to obtain composite rank and sort stocks into deciles. Long the top decile and short the bottom decile, and hold until the close. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced intraday.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The strategy is in the market only half an hour, has minimal drawdowns and consistent performance (Figure 5).