One of the widely examined anomalies that has been shown to persist in stock markets is the momentum anomaly which relates to the relationship between a stock’s historical and subsequent performance. An important implication of this anomaly is an investment strategy called momentum investing that is based on buying past winner stocks and selling past loser stocks.

In another popular strand of the literature, numerous studies have explored the effect of oil market dynamics on stock return and volatility. Oil can affect stock market dynamics via a number of different channels through the firm level or the consumer level. But mainly, oil price dynamics also contribute to stock market anomalies, because of affecting investors sentiment, which may be particularly significant in high oil-sensitive economies. This fact is backed by a study by Ding et al. (2017), proving that oil price fluctuations significantly affect investor sentiment in the Chinese stock market. The source paper expands the mentioned study by analysing the predictive ability of oil price dynamics over momentum anomaly.

As mentioned earlier, this strategy is focused on China oil market because its economy is heavily reliant on oil imports to sustain its economic growth. Moreover, China’s position as a major consumer in the world energy markets makes it perfect for studying the oil-stock market nexus from a market anomaly perspective.

Fundamental reason
Oil return volatility has robust predictive power over industry momentum payoffs in the Chinese stock market. The predictive power of oil volatility over momentum is irrespective of whether the market is in a positive or negative state and is robust even after controlling for stock market volatility as well as key macroeconomic variables. Robustness checks of the source paper suggest that oil return volatility absorbs the predictive ability of stock market volatility, implying that uncertainty surrounding oil price movements contributes to this anomaly more so than the stock market’s own volatility does.

The oil-based momentum strategy wherein the investor conditions the trade on the state of oil volatility in the month (t) yields significant returns in the following month (t+1), which amounts to a spread of 2.107% per month over the conventional momentum strategy. Overall, the predictive power of oil volatility is not only a statistical result with implications on the informational efficiency of the Chinese stock market, but also bears quite significant investment implications within and actively managed portfolio strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all A-shares listed on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges formed into industries. At the beginning of each month, rank each industry based on its return during the formation period from month t-12 to month t-2. If an individual industry formation period return is above (below) the median return across all industries, it is defined as a winner (loser). At the time, also classify a month as high (low) oil volatility if the lagged 12-month Brent oil return volatility is larger (smaller) than the lagged three-year oil return volatility. Buy (sell) loser (winner) industries at the beginning of month t, if month t-1 is of high (low) oil volatility. Rebalancing is done conditional on the oil volatility state each month based on the past 12-month oil return volatility.

Industry formation: Assign each stock to industry using the first two digits of its disclosed industry code based on the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC). Exclude industries with fewer than 5 stocks traded on any trading day during the sample period.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Source research paper doesn’t show strategy’s performance during risky times. But strategy is more profitable than classical momentum variant and strategy’s construction cater for high volatility periods.