When a CEO of some firm departure is announced without a known successor, the incumbent CEO becomes a “lame duck.” The theory says that firms with lame-duck CEOs are exposed to a potential lack of leadership that may result in stalling firms, high level of uncertainty or even freezes in significant decisions. In general, the public has a negative view of protracted transitions. The aforementioned has prompted the SEC and other regulatory bodies around the world to increase succession planning disclosure requirements.

However, in contrast to this, the novel research has found out that firms with protracted CEO successions experience positive abnormal returns. The idea is simple, for each CEO succession, the investor has to identify the first news about the CEO departure (departure announcement), the first news about the successor (successor announcement) and the date the incumbent CEO leaves office and the new CEO takes over (departure date). The most important event for the potential investor is if the successor announcement takes place after the departure announcement. The aforementioned CEO succession is defined as protracted. Otherwise, the succession is defined as prompt. As it was previously mentioned, we are only interested in the firms with the protracted CEO successions. It is adding them to the portfolio at the beginning of the following month after the departure announcement until the beginning of the next month after the successor announcement leads to a profitable strategy that exploits this “lame duck” CEO anomaly.

Fundamental reason
The paper identifies two reasons for the functionality of this anomaly. Firstly, the research has documented that investors under-react to lack of news about successor during the period between the incumbent CEO departure announcement and the announcement of the successor. The results (hazard rate tests) indicate that investor’s under-reaction to no news is part of the explanation of the positive excess return during lame-duck CEO period. The second explanation is connected with the economic mechanism driving the firm’s outperformance. After the day of the incumbent CEO’s departure announcement, firms have to undergo a tournament to select a successor from potential internal candidates. However, this internal tournament competition can be viewed as one type of intangibles which benefits firm value, but this intangible is only slowly incorporated into the stock price. The other test is connected with sorting firms into one high tournament portfolio and one low tournament portfolio. The portfolio associated with high tournament competition results in the significant positive monthly alpha of 1.5%.
Moreover, additional test about internal tournament competition in the firms proves that the portfolio with an internal new CEO is associated with more than 2% monthly excess return. Lastly, the authors have also explored other possible mechanisms that might explain the positive excess return during the lame-duck CEO period. They have examined alphas of calendar-time portfolio returns sorts on different turnover or firm characteristics. However, they concluded that neither motives for incumbent CEO departure, nor capable interim CEO nor well-functioning boards are likely to explain the abnormal return of firms with lame-duck CEOs.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P 1500 firms. The Protracted Succession portfolio includes all firms currently experiencing a lame-duck CEO reign – the firms where the incumbent departure has been announced, but the new CEO identity is still unknown. Firms are added in the Protracted Succession portfolio at the beginning of the following month after the incumbent CEO announces his/her departure and the firm remains in the Protracted Succession portfolio until the end of the month when the new CEO identity is revealed. The portfolio is equally-weighted, rebalanced monthly and hedged against Carhart’s four factors (market, value, size and momentum).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to the equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.