While value investing is often the main topic of academic research, and the value factor is widely used in the asset pricing model, growth investing has received less attention. The value investors seek stocks with low price-to-book ratio (PB), price-to-earnings (PE) or price-to-sales (PS) and usually, these companies are well-established in the market and are stable. On the contrary, growth investors focus on stocks that have the potential to grow more than their peers. Therefore, the growth stocks do not need to be those with high PB, PE or PS, and it is necessary to establish the “right” and meaningful growth factors.
An interesting insight into the growth investing (and value) provides the methodology for the growth and value indices by S&P Dow Jones Indices. In this article, three growth factors are identified that include the net change in the earnings, sales growth and momentum. All these factors are standardized and aggregated into a single score which is then compared to the value score based on the aforementioned fundamental ratios (PB, PE and PS). Using both scores, two types of indices are constructed for both styles, but we focus only on the pure growth index.
The approach described in the methodology can be replicated (or used as an inspiration) for the growth portfolio construction, offering an exposition to the profitable growth trading strategy. Moreover, the methodology can be applied to any underlying index, but we focus on the stocks with the largest cap (S&P 500).

Fundamental reason
The growth stocks are expected to grow more than the average of their sector or industry. Therefore, there is a potential for an above-average capital appreciation. Still, there is a not negligible risk connected with the growth stocks. These emerging companies bear a risk that the potential would not be fulfilled, and the expected growth would not be realized. However, this risk could be minimized by a diversification that involves systematical buying of multiple growth stocks aiming to reduce the risk of unrealized growth expectations.
Additionally, we focus on the “pure growth” methodology, which ensures no overlap between value and growth styles. Therefore, the strategy is fully exposed to the growth stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P500 stocks. Firstly, measure the growth of each stock based on three factors according to the source paper: Three-Year Net Change in Earnings per Share (Excluding Extra Items) over Current Price, Three-Year Sales per Share Growth Rate and the momentum, which is calculated as the percentual price change over 12 months. Additionally, compute also the value of each stock based on the following three factors: Book Value to Price Ratio, Earnings to Price Ratio and Sales to Price Ratio. Secondly, winsorize all the raw values to the 90th percentile and standardize the factors by subtracting their mean and dividing this difference by the standard deviation. The final growth and value score is the average of the standardized values. Nextly, rank the stocks based on their growth and value scores (individually for growth and value, the high growth score implicates a high rank).
With the established ranks, stocks are sorted in ascending order based on their growth and value ranking ratio. Therefore, the top companies have high growth rank and low value rank. Companies with the highest ratio that comprise 33% of the total index market cap are labelled as the growth basket (the same methodology is used to define the value basket). Finally, to construct the pure growth portfolio, include only stocks with the growth score larger than the average parent index growth score plus one quarter, and the “growth weight” equal to one. The “growth weight” of a company is equal to the distance of the company from the midpoint of the value basket divided by the distance of the company from the midpoint of the growth basket plus the distance of the company from the midpoint of the value basket. If the weight is larger or equal to 0.8, the weight is rounded to 1. The distance is computed based on the norms, which are defined in Appendix I. The stocks in the portfolio are weighted based on their growth score, where the growth score is capped to be 2 to avoid concentration. The portfolio is rebalanced annually.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It is a long only equity strategy. Moreover, it is obvious that the strategy suffers during bear markets.