Short-term return reversal represents a well-known market anomaly, which describes a situation where securities with the highest return over a certain short-term period subsequently tend to underperform the securities that performed poorly in the same time period, and vice versa. Even though this anomaly has been widely documented in its many forms across various markets and asset classes, there still exist gaps where it has not been documented yet.
One of these gaps has recently been filled by the novel study from Junqing Kang et al. (2021), who has documented this anomaly in the cross-section of intraday returns in the Chinese stock market. In this research, the authors mainly focus on investigating the cross-sectional relationship between previous return (from market close of day t-1 to 10 a.m. of day t) and subsequent return for the rest of the day t for the Chinese and U.S. market. Investigating this relationship, the researchers have been able to confirm a significant reversal pattern for both markets. However, as further explained in the fundamental analysis part, the more interesting finding of this research is that the drivers that cause this effect in the U.S. stock market do not apply to the Chinese market. Still, thanks to the unique characteristics and drivers, this anomaly is also present in the Chinese stock market. A trading strategy that for the rest of the day goes long(short) on the stocks with the lowest(highest) previous return earned in average a daily return of 0,32% from 2000 to 2019.

Fundamental reason
The classical explanation for the reversal effect in the U.S equity markets is based on illiquidity, meaning that price reversal represents a risk compensation for investors who provide liquidity. However, based on creating double-sort portfolios for the measure of previous return and liquidity, the authors showed that stocks’ liquidity does not create a significant difference in portfolios returns.
While the Chinese market is characterized by the high participation of retail traders, who usually do not have an advanced financial education background, it holds great liquidity but faces great irrationality. The trading decisions of these unsophisticated investors often do not consider the latest information and are influenced by the previous day’s closing price (anchoring effect). Not considering the newest information, these investors trade against the previous price movement for the rest of the day to “close the gap”. This irrationality then pressures price during the rest of the day, while the investors’ bias is only reset with the new closing price at the end of the day. This explanation is further supported by the finding that this reversal effect is significantly reversed back during the next four trading days. Also, a greater reversal effect is found among stocks, whose trading is dominated by retail investors.
Additionally, the reversal effect remains robust after controlling for traditional risk factors as size, value, momentum, volatility and volume.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks traded in Shanghai Stock Exchange and Shenzhen Stock Exchange, with codes beginning with ’60’,’ 30′ and ’00’. The intraday price data are obtained from Resset and Wind database. We consider only stocks whose current price is higher than 5 CNY, have at least 10 non-missing daily stock return during the last month and are part of the employed database for longer than 6 months. These filters are applied at the beginning of the month, and such a filtered sample is used for the rest of the month. On a daily level, exclude stocks that are paying out dividends or are undergoing a stock split.
For each stock in the sample, calculate the measure of previous return as the current price at 10:00 a.m. of day t (30 minutes after open of the Chinese stock market) divided by the closing price of the previous day t-1. At 10:15 a.m., go long(short) on the decile of stocks with the lowest(highest) measure. When creating a portfolio, exclude stocks which considered previous return has been greater than 5% in absolute value. Also, exclude stocks for which return between 10:00 and 10:15 a.m. has been greater than 5% in absolute value and stocks that have not experienced a single trade during this period. The portfolio is value-weighted and held until the market close of day t.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - In case of reversal in US, it is usually a type of “liquidity providing” strategy, and as such, they typically perform well during market crises. However, this is not a case in the China, since the strategy cannot be explained by liquidity.