The momentum effect is one of the most known anomalies in financial markets. The momentum effect is considered the strongest evidence against the efficient market hypothesis, and for this reason, momentum has attracted substantial research during recent years. There are usually two opposing views on momentum origination – underreaction and overreaction to news flow. Insider trading information can shed new light on this debate. Academic paper by Qingzhong Ma tests shows that momentum, the return continuation of past winners and losers, is attributable to investors underreacting to the information contained in preceding insider trading activity. Momentum trading strategy enhanced by insiders trading filter could, therefore, have significantly improved performance compared to basic momentum strategy.

Fundamental reason
Academic research finds that past winners (losers) continue to earn significant positive (negative) returns over the short term only if their insider trading activity indicates positive (negative) insider information. Thus, short-term momentum is attributable to investors underreacting to insider trading information that confirms past return. Due to the risk of regulatory action and shareholder litigation associated with insider trading, insiders choose not to trade (neither buy nor sell) when the expected litigation risk is high. This concern for litigation risk is asymmetric between buying and selling and is particularly strong for insider sales. Thus, when the private information insiders possess is negative, and insiders anticipate possible large price drop in the future, they do not sell. Contrary, insiders usually continue trading in case they possess positive information regarding their company.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks from NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. Stocks whose prior month-end price is lower than $5, stocks that would be classified into the lowest NYSE market capitalization decile and firms with missing or non-positive book value of equity are excluded.
Each month investor calculates the net insider demand (NID) for month j as the total number of shares insiders buy minus the total number of shares insiders sell over the past six months, normalized by the total number of shares outstanding at the end of month j-1.

Then investor uses past returns and past insider trading information to form portfolios. He assigns stocks with past six-month returns ranked in the top and bottom deciles to the “winner” and “loser” portfolios, respectively. Stocks with no insider trading activity reported over the past six months form the “silence” portfolio, and stocks with any past insider trading activity form the “traded” portfolios – “buy” and “sell” portfolios, which consist of stocks with positive and non-positive NID, respectively.

Each month investor goes long past winners with a positive NID and goes short past losers from “silence” portfolio. Stocks are held for 12 months (therefore, 1/12 of the overall portfolio is rebalanced each month). Stocks are weighted equally.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.