The low-risk anomaly is a phenomenon when portfolios of low-risk securities deliver better performance than portfolios of high-risk securities. The most researched volatility-based patterns in returns include the volatility anomaly, the idiosyncratic volatility anomaly, and the beta anomaly. Jordan and Riley (2015) contribute to the literature on volatility anomalies by documenting the volatility effect in the US mutual funds. Although their paper examines how portfolio volatility relates to performance, it does not explore the underlying sources of portfolio return volatility. Building upon the findings by Jordan and Riley (2015), in a novel study, Vafai and Rakowski (2022) decompose the return variance (σ^2) of the US mutual funds into the security-level variance (ν) and the within-fund security covariance (ψ). To identify the source of differences in the performance between the low- and high-volatility mutual funds, the authors sort the funds into decile groups according to their σ^2, ν, and ψ components. The study results have shown that a low volatility decile outperformed a high volatility decile regardless of the construction method. Returns of decile groups formed on overall variance σ^2, and the covariance risk component ψ monotonically decreased with the higher risk level. However, deciles formed on ν followed an inverse-U shape, with the highest performance for the middle deciles. Overall, these results proved that the ψ component of volatility drives the patterns otherwise attributed to total variance σ^2. Accordingly, buying the low-volatility mutual funds as measured by variance σ^2 or within-fund security covariance ψ leads to a profitable trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
The financial theory states that the higher the expected return of an asset, the higher is its risk. In practice, however, investors tend to overpay for risky assets, aiming to achieve high returns in the shortest possible time. As a result, high (low) volatility assets become overvalued (undervalued), associated with lower (higher) subsequent returns. Markowitz (1952, 1959) demonstrated that a portfolio’s total risk, measured by the variance of portfolio returns σ^2, can be decomposed into a component arising from the variance of the portfolio holdings ν and a component arising from the covariances of holdings ψ. Studies following Markowitz acknowledge that the ν component converges to zero as diversification increases. Diversification, however, does not eliminate the ψ component. Accordingly, it is the covariance of the holdings within the portfolio ψ that drives the volatility-based return patterns otherwise attributed to the overall variance σ^2.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all funds from the CRSP mutual fund database. Firstly, drop funds with less than 80% of their assets invested in stocks covered by CRSP during the current and previous year. For the mutual funds with multiple share classes, sum their assets across all share classes and weigh all other fund attributes (including return) by the lagged assets held in each class. Secondly, each month and for each mutual fund k, calculate the return variance σ^2 given the equation 1 (double sum of covariances between each two assets multiplied by their weights in the portfolio). Decompose the funds’ total variance σ^2 into the average constituent holdings’ variance ν and the average constituent holdings’ covariance ψ (see equation 2 – the equation 1 can be rewritten as sum of weighed variances plus sum of weighted covariances of distinct assets). Compute the monthly average constituent holdings’ variance ν using the daily return of each security i held by fund k (see equation 3a – sum of weighed variances). Then calculate the average covariance of securities ψ held by fund k by subtracting the average holdings’ variance ν from the total fund’s volatility σ^2 (see equations 3b and 3c). Thirdly, every month sort the mutual funds into the equally-weighted decile groups based on their return variance (σ^2), average holdings’ variance (ν), and the average holdings’ covariance (ψ). The trading rule for the strategy is as follows: each month, allocate 50% to the bottom decile group consisting of mutual funds with the lowest variance σ^2 and 50% to the bottom decile comprising the mutual funds with the lowest average holdings’ covariance ψ. Therefore, the strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Although the beta of strategies is lower than that of the market, it is a long-only equity strategy.