The paper presents scientists’ key innovation —the SMI (the Smart Money Indicator)— a relative sentiment indicator that measures the aggregate positioning in equities of institutions comparable to individuals with the use of data from the “legacy” Commitments of Traders (CoT) report. According to the authors, the key innovation of the SMI’s construction is its incorporation of cross-hedging pressures from long-duration bonds and points along the yield curve. Then, utilizing research findings of that advantage coming from this powerful alternative to value and momentum, we propose following Smart Money and their smart beta, which bring us with practical and exceptionally robust market timing strategy.

Fundamental reason
Previous studies have repeatedly shown institutional investors tend to outperform individual investors over intermediate time horizons. Thus, one should attempt to time the market; mimicking the actions of institutions appears to be a better bet than siding with individuals. The used indicator derived is from the Commitments of Traders (COT) report, which measures the aggregate degree to which institutional investors are long or short equities relative to individual investors. COT report separates traders into three classifications: “Commercials,” “Non-commercials,” and “Non-reportables” and these are inputs into our following presented strategy.


Simple trading strategy
The data source is from CoT on the CFTC (Commodity Futures Trading Commission)’s website. It is about “institutional-versus-individual” relative sentiment (IIRS) positioning in Equities represented by the S&P 500 Stock Index, Long-Duration in the (30-Year) U.S. Treasury Bond (which one is being negative, thus substracted), and Yield-Curve as the difference in the 10-Year U.S. Treasury Note and the corresponding relative sentiment in the U.S. Treasury Bond. The investment universe then consists of single SPY ETF equity. First, we calculate a one-week lag (78) SMI time series with z-score lookback N = 78 weeks and extrema lookback M = 5 weeks from the sum of the 3 listed additive combinations as on eq. (2), in which those three components are computed as composite z-scores, i.e., weighted combinations of the respective z-scores of the institutions’ and individuals’ standalone net positioning in the applicable futures contracts as shown on eq. (1), and finally, finalize it by computing eq. (3) where we subtract the cumulative median of the SMI composite z-score. “Long-or-flat” factor timing strategy is that the investor goes long SPY on the day when the prior-week SMI is positive (negative) and is flat (staying in cash), otherwise; the portfolio is being rebalanced weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - It’s a market timing strategy, going long SPY ETF, so it can’t be used as hedge to bear markets in equities.