The short-term contrarian strategy (buying losers and selling winners) is a well-documented strategy in individual stocks. However, research suggests this strategy should be successful on a country level, too. Liquid futures on national equity indexes ensure a simple execution, and research papers indicate an attractive performance for this strategy. We present a strategy that trades futures contracts in European regions; however, the research suggests the strategy’s profitability in other regions as well.

Fundamental reason
Short-run contrarian portfolios are based on the belief that selling past winners and buying past losers can produce significant excess/active returns relative to benchmark portfolios. Evidence of short-horizon return predictability is consistent with the overreaction hypothesis, namely that traders over-adjust their posterior beliefs to news more than is warranted by fundamentals. The patterns in shorter horizons tend to be relatively persistent. Even in efficient markets, one can formulate return-based trading strategies to profit from the regularities of short-term reversals.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 7 EU index futures traded in Germany, France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, and Austria. In all futures markets, only the nearest-to-expiry futures contracts are actively traded. Futures returns in each country for the preceding five days are calculated (evaluation period). The European sector’s equal-weighted benchmark return is calculated as the average return of all markets in the evaluation period. The investment universe is then divided into a winner’s portfolio (countries with returns higher than the benchmark) and a loser’s portfolio (countries with returns lower than the benchmark). The investor goes long on the loser’s countries and short on the winner’s countries. The weight of each futures contract is proportional to the performance difference from the benchmark (higher difference -> higher weight). The portfolio is rebalanced weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Equity reversal strategies usually type of “liquidity providing” strategies, and as such, they usually perform well during market crises. However, reversal strategies are also naturally a “short volatility” strategy; their returns increase mainly in the weeks following large stock market declines. Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.