Momentum is a well-established investment style well examined by academics and widely used by practitioners. Given its long history, it was repeatedly tested by scholars and in investment portfolios, and it was found that momentum tends to suffer from crashes. However, the crashes did not cause the momentum to be forgotten but instead motivated a search for a solution for the crashes, such as risk-adjusted momentum or other known approaches from the literature.
Novel research by Chitsiripanich et al. (2022) is another research paper that provides a solution to alleviate momentum crashes. Despite the same goal, the authors have developed a distinct methodology compared to other studies and utilize a time-series approach and the fractional-difference filter. Albeit the definition is more complex compared to the traditional momentum, where the momentum signal is defined as the past return, the method allows the preservation of the memory in the data and could be easily understood as a mixture of momentum and reversal signals. Therefore, the new approach can be easily understood on the fundamental level since momentum and reversal are widely examined phenomena. Furthermore, the authors test the technique using numerous parameters in the fractional-difference filter and several investment universes (even without small caps) and explore the effect of costs. Therefore, the results indicate that the strategy should be robust and applicable in practice.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality lies in using a time-series approach and the fractional difference filter to process the price series. The procedure can utilize all the data during the look-back period compared to only using two data points at the start and the end of the look-back period (as in simple momentum or reversal). Even though the procedure is complex, it can be easily understood as a mixture of momentum and reversal signals, which are well-examined. As a result, the functionality is given by the combination of two well-working investment styles.
Furthermore, the authors provide a battery of robustness tests and evaluate the effect of transaction costs.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ with share codes 10 and 11. Foreign shares, certificates, American depository receipts, shares of beneficial interest, depository units, American trust components, close-end funds, and real estate investment trusts are filtered out. Additionally, the investment universe consists only of stocks in the top 90% of the total market capitalization on the rebalancing data (mid and large-caps). Stock price data is obtained from CRSP. As the first step, consider a vector of log prices for each stock and its entire history. The fractional differencing is based on the lag operator, which is common in the time-series analysis, and the details can be found in section 2.1. The order of the fractional difference operator is set to be 0.9, which results in a mixture of momentum and short-term reversal signals (d=0 results in short-term reversal and d=1 in classical momentum). The first step involves obtaining the fractionally differenced log-price sequences, which are inverted to allow for a computation of the predicted log return. The methodology differs based on the chosen d (because values of 0 or 1 simplify the equation to simple signals) and whether the data is truncated. The authors suggest using a non-truncated version (using all past observations). Therefore the predicted return is equal to the weighted sum of past log prices, where weights differ based on the length of the history and look-back period (see equation 11). Secondly, use the weights to predict the return using equation 12. Finally, sort the stocks into quintiles based on the expected return; long the highest quintile, and short the lowest quintile. The strategy is rebalanced daily with a weekly holding period.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Not present.