Academic research has identified the major influence of pre-scheduled macroeconomic announcements on market prices. Naturally, information about inflation, unemployment, or interest rates affects stock prices. Studies have shown that the market portfolio during the macroeconomic announcements is highly profitable, and the slope of the security market line is significantly positive on pre-scheduled announcement days. However, after a big jump during announcement days, there is a correction. During post-announcement days, the slope of the security market line is significantly negative, and two days after the announcement, the profits of the announcement day investment are erased. Therefore, the long high beta and short, low beta positions have to be closed before the aforementioned two days. Moreover, the positions should be flipped during those days to utilize the reversal effect, forming a distinct and novel trading strategy. The research has proved that during two post-announcement days, it is highly profitable to buy the lowest beta decile and short the highest beta decile.

Fundamental reason
The idea of the strategy could be easily understood with the basic knowledge of linear regression (and CAPM asset pricing model). While during the announcement day, the security market line has a significantly positive slope, the slope is significantly negative post-announcement. This means that the high beta stocks have a negative return, and the low beta stocks have a positive return. Moreover, the slope is robust to many robustness checks, and according to the research, it is stable during various sample periods. Last but not least, the reason for the functionality is not risk-based. The paper did not find any reduction in the riskiness of the market portfolio after the macroeconomic news release, indicating that this pattern is a correction from the announcement day. More probably, the pattern is driven by the processing of information. The bad news is reflected in stock prices more slowly than good news. Stock returns firstly jump on announcement days, but the returns decline on post-announcement days. As a result, there is a correction after announcement days that can be a base of a trading strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the highest and lowest beta deciles of CRSP stocks based on their pre-ranking CAPM beta, according to NYSE cut-offs, based on monthly returns for the past five years. The exact number of stocks depends on the needs of a diversification. Days with macroeconomic announcements are dates with pre-scheduled news announcements about employment situation, inflation and the Federal Open Market Committee meetings. After the announcement day, buy the lowest beta decile and short the highest beta decile. The positions are held for two subsequent days after the announcement.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.