Chinese stock market is often largely different from the US market. The Chinese equity markets have a different composition of investor compared to the US market, but usually, the main differences are caused by different regulations. The presented research paper examines the seasoned equity offering (SEO) in China. In the Chinese equity markets, there exists a long interval between the announcement of SEO and the execution date, and regulations are the cause.
Naturally, the goal of the management of the firm issuing new shares is to time the market and sell the overpriced stocks, thus getting more capital. The research shows that Chinese managers are successfully reaching this goal. Although the stock prices decline after the initial SEO announcement, the stocks tend to rise again. According to the research, the China Securities Regulatory Commission approves the new stock issue after a significant stock price increase. Moreover, results show that there is an additional significant stock price increase after the approval; therefore, before the actual execution of SEO, the stock tends to be overpriced. Managers can utilize this price increase and time the market. However, the overpriced stock after the SEO tends to be, to a great extent, unprofitable. Therefore, this effect can be utilized by going short stocks after their SEOs, and at the same time, going long similar stocks without SEOs.

Fundamental reason
If firms want to raise capital using SEO in China, it needs approval from the regulator. However, firms are allowed to issue shares up to six months after the approval. Naturally, managers are most likely to choose the execution day when the stock is traded near or at its highest price. Therefore, the stock at the time of the execution is largely overpriced. This results in a significant reversal after the successful SEO and stocks tend to fall, which can be easily utilized in a trading strategy by shorting such stocks.
Moreover, the paper compares the results also to the US market, and the logic holds. After all, the managers would naturally like to issue overpriced shares. The difference is in the length of the period between the announcement and the execution. China has a more extended period, but the results are in line with the known finance theory.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks of Chinese firms with public seasoned equity offerings (SEO) in the CSMAR database. Firstly, identify the stocks with SEO executions in a given month. Take a short position in the stock a one month after execution, and take a long position in the non-SEO matching portfolio based on the size, book-to-market and momentum in the month before the execution. Stocks listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange are sorted each month into 4×4×4 portfolios based on the size, book-to-market and momentum (12-months), and out of these 64 portfolios, one is chosen to be the “matching”. The strategy is value-weighted and positions are held for six months.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - While taking a short position in overpriced stocks, the strategy also takes a long position in a market portfolio with matching characteristics.