Short-term reversal is a simple trading strategy that buys stocks with the worst returns over the past month and sells stocks with the best returns over the same horizon. Academic research shows that the performance of this simple strategy could be easily enhanced by using the least volatile large-cap stocks as an investment sub-universe. Larger stocks mean lower slippage, which helps in the strategy’s implementation, and a long/short portfolio removes the exposure to the market factor for better correlation characteristics.

Fundamental reason
Several fundamental reasons for the anomaly’s existence are stated in academic research. The explanations for the short-term reversal include market-microstructure considerations (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1995; and Conrad, Gultekin and Kaul, 1997), illiquidity (Avramov, Chordia, and Goyal, 2006), and reversals in beliefs (Subrahmanyam 2005).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks with prices higher than $5 per share. At the beginning of each month, the sample is divided into equal halves, at the size median, and only larger stocks are used. Then each month, realized returns and realized (annualized) volatilities are calculated for each stock for the past one month. One week (seven calendar days) prior to the beginning of each month is skipped to avoid biases due to microstructures. Stocks are then sorted into quintiles based on their realized past returns and past volatility. The investor goes long on stocks from the lowest-performing quintile from the lowest volatility group and short on stocks from the highest performing quintile from the lowest volatility group. Stocks are equally weighted and held for one month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg can be maybe used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.