The traditional momentum effect (the past 6-12 month-long winners, short losers and rebalanced on a monthly basis) is one of the strongest and most pervasive anomalies ever documented. This simple strategy is used quite often, and this creates several unasked consequences. Momentum stocks are highly crowded, and this strategy could experience strong unexpected drawdowns as everybody tries to exit the same stocks at the same time. It is therefore valuable to use an alternative momentum definition to avoid crowded trades. Academic research by Chaves (2012) offers one such definition, idiosyncratic momentum, where the momentum is calculated using idiosyncratic returns from market regressions. The strategy offers a higher Sharpe ratio than traditional momentum, works very well within a large-cap universe (which is an additional positive point as it is easier to implement) and is significant even in countries where traditional momentum doesn’t work at all (e.g.. Japan).

Fundamental reason
Academic research postulates that momentum strategies tend to experience long periods of poor performance following market downturns and contemporaneously with market rebounds. The reason for the underperformance is the optionality embedded in the “losers'” portfolio; investors who sell this portfolio short get rewarded during market downturns but suffer big losses in market rebounds. By selecting stocks that exhibit better idiosyncratic performance, the strategy avoids companies whose outperformance is due mostly to high market beta.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks with a capitalization higher than the 20th percentile for market capitalization among NYSE stocks (large caps). The excess monthly return over a risk-free rate for each stock is calculated. The last three years of data are used to estimate the CAPM regression for each stock (using the market factor from the Kenneth French data library as an independent variable). The idiosyncratic momentum is calculated as the cumulative idiosyncratic return (residuals from the regression) over the 11-month period (month t-12 to month t-2). Stocks are sorted into quintiles based on the idiosyncratic momentum, and the investor goes long on stocks from the top quintile, and he/she goes short on stocks from the bottom quintile. Stocks are weighted equally, and the portfolio is rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to equity the market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.