Credits ratings in the financial world are notoriously known even among the public. For a long time, there were issuer-paid credit ratings, where rating agencies extracted fees directly from bond issuers. Three largest credit ratings agencies mostly dominate this sector: Standard and Poor’s (S&P), Moody’s Investors Service (Moody’s), and Fitch Ratings. Since issuers pay the ratings, it raised many questions among both investors and academics. According to the academic literature, issuer-paid credit rating agencies tend to delay the release of negative news, giving favourable ratings to firms in their owners’ portfolios or assigning higher ratings to those issuers who pay them for non-rating services. Aforementioned can broadly undermine the trust of investors that can have doubts about the timeliness of such ratings. To a large extent, the confidence can also be hampered by bankruptcies such as Enron, WorldCom and Lehman Brothers. However, there are also investor-paid credit rating agencies, for example, Egan-Jones Ratings (EJR). This paper examines how institutional investors react to both issuer-paid and investor-paid ratings. While using the abnormal trading activity of institutional investors, the research has found that investors tend to react asymmetrically. They tend to react more to positive issuer-paid rating upgrades and more negative to investor-paid rating downgrades. While in issuer-paid agencies may be delays with downgrades, there certainly would not be delays with upgrades.

On the other hand, investor-paid agencies are not biased and can provide timeliness downgrades. A trading strategy can be based on this finding, that simply short stocks with investor-paid downgrades and long stocks with issuer-paid upgrades. Such strategy outperforms strategy that reacts to changes in all ratings, changes of investor-paid ratings, changes of issuer-paid ratings or passive holding of S&P500 index.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, on the one hand, issuer-paid agencies have tendencies to delay negative credit rating announcements due to the potential conflict of interest. On the other hand, there is absolutely no reason to postpone positive credit rating announcements. Issuers would probably like to see positive announcements as soon as possible. According to this research, the delay and the informational gap can be filled by investor-paid agencies that do not have any bias or reason to delay negative rating announcements. Institutional investors abnormally decrease their holdings after investor-paid downgrades but do not respond to issuer-paid downgrades. With upgrades, the situation reverts. Investors significantly increase holdings around issuer-paid upgrades and do not react to investor-paid rating upgrades. Therefore, they consider investor-paid rating downgrades as more timely, but they also value issuer-paid upgrades as more relevant than investor-paid upgrades. To sum it up, the functionality is based mainly on the timeliness of credit rating information. That timeliness depends on whether it is positive or negative information.

Last but not least, the strategy design is in line with a well-known result of academic literature, where it was found that many times it is profitable to follow professional, sophisticated investors.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of Compustat and CRSP stocks for which are available transaction-level data provided by the Abel/Noser Corporation and credit rating data of Egan-Jones Rating Company (EJR), Standard and Poor’s (SP), Moody’s Investors Service and Fitch Ratings. In practice, it should be enough to match credit rating data with stocks, but the paper examines institutional investors. The stock of the rated company is shorted following EJR’s negative rating signals, and stock of the rated company is bought following issuer-paid credit rating agencies (SP, Moody’s and Fitch) positive rating signals. The portfolio is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.