Value effect is one of the best-known in the world of investment. HML (high-minus-low) strategy, which buys stocks with high book-to-market ratio (inverse P/B ratio) and sells stocks with low book-to-market, is based on the intuition that value stocks are cheap relative to their fundamentals (and are therefore considered to be undervalued). However, the recent paper by Jiang (2016) suggests that the P/B ratio as such is not a reliable predictor of future stock returns. Instead, the author decomposed the indicator into two components – fundamental (fitted values; based on cash flow variables) and transitory (residual) – which predict future expected returns contradictorily: high fundamental component predicts high future expected returns; high transitory component predicts low future expected returns. Therefore, a combined strategy which buys HML Transitory strategy and sells HML Fundamental strategy (see Simple trading strategy for their composure) ought to produce significant returns – which it did over the 1981-2014 sample period, with the annual return and Sharpe ratio higher than well-known Fama-and-French Value strategy.

Fundamental reason
The author identifies two explanations for the positive relationship between fundamental component and expected returns: sluggish price adjustment and sluggish quantity adjustment. The former means that although investors pay higher prices for quality stocks (stocks with high fundamental component), they do not adjust the prices enough to account for their cash flow growth. The latter means that investors do not actively invest in quality stocks after news about their quality become public. Therefore, in both cases, prices are fully adjusted with some delay. Regarding the transitory component, the author provides evidence suggesting that its return predictability is explained by return reversal.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 12,380 stocks listed at NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ (conditions to be met by a stock to be included are named in Appendix B), whose accounting data are available at Compustat database. To separate fundamental and transitory components of P/B ratio, the investor runs a regression of P/B ratio on various firm-level accounting variables ( firms’ current gross profit over the asset, last year’s growth in gross profit, and a constant, as described on p. 10). Then, the fitted values constitute a fundamental component, and the residuals constitute the transitory component. Two separate strategies are to be constructed. First, the HMLFundamental sorts the stocks into quintiles based on the fundamental component – goes long on bottom quintile and short on top quintile. The process is analogical in the case of HMLTransitory. In year t, the investor goes long on HMLTransitory strategy and short on HMLFundamental strategy, based on the accounting data from t-1. Portfolios are to be rebalanced annually. Stock in the portfolios is value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Long-only value stocks logically can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high). Now, evidence for using long-short value factor portfolio as a hedge against equity market is very mixed. Firstly, there are a lot of definitions of value factor (from a simple standard P/B ratios to various more complex definition as in this strategy) and performance of different value factors differ in times of stress. But there are multiple research papers in a tone of work of Cakici and Tan: “Size, Value, and Momentum in Developed Country Equity Returns: Macroeconomic and Liquidity Exposures” that link value factor premium to liquidity and growth risk and shows that the implication is that value factor returns can be low prior to periods of low global economic growth and bad liquidity.