Very complex companies are hard to evaluate as the investor has to consider the effects of many different industrial branches in which the company runs a business. It is, therefore, no surprise that academic research detected price anomaly in complicated firms – conglomerates. Research says that investors’ limited processing capacity and complexity in information processing leads to a significant delay in the impounding of information into asset prices. Therefore new information is reflected first in the prices of easy-to-analyze firms (operating in a single industry) and then in the more complicated firms (conglomerates). Therefore a portfolio of single industry companies with the same structure as conglomerates would predict conglomerates returns.

Fundamental reason
Fundament behind this strategy is already explained in “Short Description” section – research shows that investors’ limited processing and capital capacity and complexity in information processing leads to a significant delay in the impounding of information into asset prices. New information is reflected first in the prices of easy-to-analyze firms (operating in the single industry) and then in more complicated (conglomerates) – the portfolio of the single industry firms” predicts conglomerates returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of companies traded on NYSE, Amex and Nasdaq. Stocks with a price lower than $5 and stocks whose market capitalizations are below the 10th percentile of NYSE stocks are excluded. Firms are divided into two groups – standalone companies and conglomerates. Standalone firms are defined as those operating in only one industry – sales from that industry account for more than 80% of the total sales. Conglomerates are the firms operating in more than one industry and that the aggregate sales from all reported segments account for more than 80% of the total sales of the firm.

At the end of June in each year, investor constructs a corresponding “pseudo-conglomerate” for each conglomerate firm. A “pseudo-conglomerate” is a portfolio of the conglomerate firm’s industry segments constructed using the standalone firms (easy-to-analyze firms) in each industry solely; the segment portfolios are then weighted by the percentage of sales contributed by each industry segment within the conglomerate. Then at the beginning of each month investor sorts all conglomerate firms into deciles based on the returns of their corresponding pseudo-conglomerate portfolios in the previous month. Each month investor goes long in conglomerate firms whose paired pseudo-conglomerates performed best in the prior month and sells short those conglomerate firms whose pseudo-conglomerates performed worse. Conglomerate stocks are weighted equally, and the portfolio is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.

