The momentum strategy is probably the best-known anomaly in equity markets. It is also very popular and therefore high/low momentum stocks could become very crowded as many portfolio managers/traders are chasing the same stocks seeking abnormal returns. However, a very simple measure could be used to detect the amount of arbitrage activity in momentum – pairwise correlation analysis. Academic research shows that the return to momentum strategy is much higher in a case when arbitrage activity is low than in other instances. This finding could be used to create a successful filter for a momentum strategy.

Fundamental reason
Academic research states that when the amount of capital deployed in the price momentum strategy is low, price momentum is more likely to be an underreaction phenomenon; that is, we should observe price continuation in the short run, but no return reversal over the long run. In contrast, when the amount of arbitrage capital in the price momentum strategy is high, price momentum will tend to be an overreaction phenomenon; prices overshoot as a result of arbitrageurs’ overcorrecting noise traders’ underreaction to information. Consequently, we should see a reversal pattern in the long run. Moreover, when the strategy is crowded, if arbitrageurs are forced to withdraw capital from the momentum strategy, their collective unwinding of positions (either due to margin calls, or the low-performance relation) can lead to abrupt momentum crashes.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks from NYSE, Amex and Nasdaq. Stocks with prices below $5 a share and/or are in the bottom NYSE size decile are excluded.

At the end of each month, investor sorts all stocks into deciles based on their previous 12-month return (skipping the most recent month). He then computes pairwise partial correlations using 52 weekly returns for all stocks in each decile in the portfolio ranking period. He controls for the Fama-French three factors in computing these partial correlations to purge out any comovement in stock returns in the same momentum decile induced by known risk factors. ComomL (loser comomentum) is the average pairwise partial correlation for the loser decile. The investor then checks existing history and trades classical momentum strategy (long winner decile, short loser decile) only if actual month CommonL is in the lowest quintile of historical CommonL values.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy is timing momentum factor and using the correlation of stocks in a loser portfolio as the timing indicator. The investor holds momentum factor portfolio only during low correlation periods which is not during bear markets (when the correlation is usually the highest).