Both value and momentum anomalies are generally recognized by both academics and practitioners. Past research has identified signiﬁcant co-movements in value and momentum strategies and negative correlation between value and momentum. This novel research examines the dynamics of value strategies, their connections to behavioural theories and tests if the market state significantly impacts their proﬁtability. Naturally, there could be deﬁned two states that symbolize whether the equity market is prosperous or not. This paper recognizes “UP” state, when the lagged two-year market return is not negative and “DOWN” state when the lagged two-year market return is negative. Examination of the relationship between value strategies and market state led to a finding that the most signiﬁcant part of value proﬁt is realized following DOWN periods. Moreover, there could be identified episodes when payoﬀs of value strategies are extreme and such events are contemporaneous with momentum strategy crashes. Utilizing the aforementioned leads to a simple, yet profitable trading strategy that finds the ideal time for the employment of the value strategy. Such an approach simply maximizes profits of the value strategy, and the monthly value premium is, on average, three times the unconditional monthly value premium.

Fundamental reason
According to the literature, the value premium is based on the proposition that value investors bet against naive investors. Naive investors tend to overreact to news, extrapolate past earnings growth too far in the future or assume trends in stock prices. Authors state that according to behavioural theory, a decrease in momentum trades dampen the selling pressure from momentum traders on underpriced stocks that have very likely performed badly in the past, augmenting, therefore, the proﬁt of values strategists who constantly invest disproportionally in these stocks. Same could be said about an increase in momentum trades that strengthen the buying pressure from momentum traders on overpriced stocks that have performed well in the past, what enhances the profit of value strategy that constantly under-invest in these stocks. Moreover, after persistent market declines (the “DOWN” market state), underpriced stocks have likely experienced a long series of negative earning shocks. As a result, past overreaction should forecast a superior return for the underpriced stocks in the subsequent period following the DOWN market state.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of value-weighted decile portfolios returns sorted on B/M equity ratios from the Kenneth French data library (can be probably substituted by picking the appropriate ETFs). Firstly, each month, identify the state of the market as the return on the CRSP value weight index (including dividend) over the past 24 months if the return is negative, long the highest decile portfolio and short the lowest decile portfolio. Positions are held for six months.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Strategy can be probably used as a hedge. Strategy buys an equity long/short portfolio during high market stress (when the 24-month performance of the equity index is negative) and still has a positive performance.