Scholars from Henley Business School provide convincing evidence that past economic trends are positively related to equity market index returns. Authors found that the economic momentum strategy outperforms popular momentum strategies documented in the literature, such as time-series momentum and value-and-momentum strategies. Substantial predictive power of past trends in a country’s fundamentals on its future stock market index performance allows one to perform an economic momentum long-short portfolio, which is to be included in our database and is built on one coupled economic momentum variable from fundamental data. It yields an annualized alpha of 3.72% (still a return of 2.14% after transaction costs) and exhibits a Sharpe ratio of 0.87.

Fundamental reason
The paper contributes to the literature by providing cross-sectional works suggesting that economic momentum matters to country-level stock markets where this area was not covered and was lacking (prior works focused on FX markets). Specifically, one standard deviation increase in the weights derived from a country’s economic momentum signals leads to a 24 basis points increase in the excess returns on the country index futures, which we term as economic momentum effects. A previously mentioned strategy called the economic momentum combo portfolio built upon this effect generates a Sharpe ratio of 0.87 and an annualized return of 3.60%. The authors also contribute to the literature by providing evidence arguing that the profitability of time-series momentum effects in global stock markets over the sample period from 1989 to 2020 is questionable. Empirical evidence is provided arguing that its time-varying persistence in global stock markets is present. However, they do not further conduct works to examine if that is due to similar mispricing corrections since it is not the main purpose of that paper. Future studies extending this could be interesting.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of index futures contracts in developed markets, namely Australia (S&P/ASX 200), Canada (S&P/TSX 60), France (CAC 40), Germany (DAX), Italy (FTSE/MIB), Japan (TOPIX), Sweden (OMX STKH30), Switzerland (SWISS MKT), the United Kingdom (FTSE 100), and the United States (S&P 500).
(Retrieve daily settlement prices of futures contracts with different maturities from Bloomberg. Obtain macro-variables from the OECD.)

1. Data Preparation and Processing: Follow (Dahlquist and Hasseltoft, 2020) to convert the quarterly data into monthly data. (In detail, the value observed at the end of quarter Q would be repeated monthly in quarter Q+1 to avoid any look-ahead bias. Moreover, this data is one-quarter lagged to ensure our access to economic variables for all countries.) 1. Construct composite daily continue-series futures returns for each equity market.

The positive macro effect index is the average log growth of the consumer price index, producer price index, and total manufacturing.

The negative macro effect index is the average log growth of the OECD leading indicator, hourly earnings, and gross domestic production. The economic momentum combo portfolio (CM) combines all the sub-strategies above (by weighting explained at the end).
2. Selected Variant Variable Calculation: First, calculate the economic momentum signals as cumulative returns over a specific lookback period on the macro indices at the end of every month for each country in the sample period. Second, form a dollar-neutral sub-strategy that buys (sells) one country’s market index when its relative macro index shows stronger (weaker) momentum signals than its peers – if it’s in the top/bottom half. The lookback periods strategy investigates vary from 1 to 60 months, resulting in 120 sub-strategies (60 lookback periods multiplied by 2 macro indices). Third, group these economic momentum sub-strategies into portfolios. To form a portfolio, aggregate sub-strategies by weighting them based on their inverse volatilities (not necessary, simple equally weighting would be probably sufficient). Finally, a combo portfolio aggregates all 120 sub-strategies.

Strategy is rebalanced monthly

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The economic momentum strategy maintains strong persistence, profitability, and stability over time. However, especially after the global financial crisis, the benchmarks exhibit higher downside risk and greater volatility. (CM consistently maintains a drawdown of approximately under 4% over time.)