Most of the academic research concludes that options markets are used mainly by informed traders as options provide favourable conditions for taking leverage positions. It is therefore desirable for ordinary traders to observe changes in options markets. One such informative signal is the ratio of options volume to total stock volume (see strategy nbr. 217). Another valuable indicator changes in options volume (compared to equity volume). Growing option volume on particular stock signalizes that informed traders started to be interested in that stock. As informed traders like to use option market especially for “bear” view (as it is often easier to trade options than short stocks) then it is better to avoid this stock (or short it). Contrary, stocks with decreasing option volume implies a lower risk for a long position. Long/short strategy based on the change in O/S volume ratio provides attractive results; however, caution is required as a short side could be hard to trade. Change in O/S ratio could also be used for long-only trading to pick low-risk stocks.

Fundamental reason
Research postulates that the negative relation between O/S and future returns is driven by short-sale costs in equity markets, which make option markets an attractive venue for traders with
negative news. Capital constraints and equity short-sale costs lead informed agents to trade options more frequently for negative signals than positive ones, thus predicting a negative relation between relative option volume and future equity value.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of US firms with liquid options (CEFs, REITs, ADRs and firms with a stock price below $1 are eliminated).

Each month, investor calculated the ratio of total options volume to total stock volume (O/S ratio). Option volume equals the total volume in option contracts across all strikes for options expiring in the 30 trading days beginning five days after the month-end. Equity volume is expressed in round lots of 100 to make it more comparable to the number of option contracts that each pertain to 100 shares. Change in O/S ratio is defined as is as the difference between the actual O/S ratio and the average O/S ratio over the prior six months, scaled by this average. Each month, the investor takes a short position in stocks with high O/S change and a long position in stocks with low O/S change. The portfolio is rebalanced monthly, and stocks are weighted equally.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.