Stock return skewness and its implications for asset pricing have received a lot of spotlight in the investing world in recent years. Prior research shows that higher skewness is associated with a lower expected return. However, according to Xing, Zhang, and Zhao (2010), skewness and anticipated returns have a positive relationship. Overall, the data on the influence of skewness on stock returns across the board is varied and inconclusive. Furthermore, the most important question to answer is how to measure return asymmetry empirically.
Novel research presents two new distribution-based metrics of stock return asymmetry. The first is based on the probability difference between a stock’s upside potential and downside loss (this metric is denoted as IE – idiosyncratic asymmetry), while the second is an entropy-scaled version of the former. The new metrics presented in the paper take into account more information (i.e. the data’s density function) than the commonly used skewness measure, which only takes into account the third moment. As a result, simulations and empirical data demonstrate that they capture asymmetry better. Furthermore, according to the new measures, higher asymmetries in the cross-section of stock returns suggest lower average returns. Finally, empirical findings based on skewness are unclear, thus the suggested measures complement skewness well.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the logic behind the investors’ behavioral bias. If IE is positive, the likelihood of extreme profits exceeds the chance of extreme losses. Therefore, investors would overreact to this news and choose extraordinary gains over severe losses if all other factors were equal. Consequently, investors bid up the price of a stock with a high probability of extreme profits and at the same time pay a lower price for stocks with a high chance of severe losses. As a result, the expected returns are much lower when IE is larger if all other factors were equal.
Additionally, the presented new asymmetry measures explain the cross-section of stock returns better than skewness. Although the measurements are equal to skewness under certain conditions, they capture higher-order asymmetry, which is linked with a lower expected return for distributions with zero skewness. Therefore, the new measures provide additional information that cant be provided just by using skewness. Further, the authors provide examination by sorting stocks into deciles based on both skewness and the newly presented asymmetry measures. The result shows that high-skewness portfolios do not necessarily imply low returns. However, high upside asymmetries based on the new asymmetry measures are strongly associated with low returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ), excluding stocks with beginning-of-month prices less than $5. Firstly, estimate the regression of excess return for each stock where independent variables include the market excess return and squared market excess returns from month t to t-11 (see equation 15). Secondly, based on the distribution of the residuals, calculate the idiosyncratic asymmetry (IE) (see equation 1) using the empirical distribution function/empirical density function. IE is defined as the difference in the cumulative probability of huge gains and losses. The probabilities are calculated at one standard deviation away from the mean. Choose the variable c so that this condition is fulfilled. If IE is positive, the likelihood of extreme profits exceeds the chance of severe losses. Finally, sort the stocks into deciles based on the IE. The trading strategy goes long for the lowest IE and short for the highest IE stocks. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source research paper doesn’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.