(Buraschi, Pellegrino, Jan. 2024) revisit Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) and find that in the cross-section, there is a continuation in observing significant heterogeneity and the difference in short-selling ability for large and small stocks, which has actually increased from January 1999 to December 2022, even though the average short interest has increased. Using this cross-sectional information about stock-specific short interest, they find that a conditional cross-sectional momentum strategy re-emerges as strongly as before, with even larger α [alpha] than the ones reported by their procedures; therefore, we selected strategy results on the relevant abovementioned subperiod (ranging from January 1999 to 2022). In a nutshell, you choose to long (buy) winners that have small short interest and simultaneously short losers that have high short interest.

Fundamental reason
In the last 25 years, several factors have contributed to creating an environment where short-selling is more efficient, accessible, and subject to better oversight, contributing to an overall improvement in the ability and cost of short-selling stocks. During the same period, the abnormal returns of an unconditional cross-sectional momentum strategy, as defined in Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), have disappeared on average. This paper finds supporting evidence for the role that short-selling constraints may play in the dynamics of asset prices, as discussed in Scheinkman and Xiong (2003). It also establishes a link between the size interaction and the momentum effect. Initially, the literature conjectured that this link could be due to information friction: small companies enjoy lower analyst coverage on average, limiting the speed of information diffusion, thus allowing for positive serial correlation in returns (Hong et al., 2000). Main authors argue, on the other hand, that small firms are more challenging to short, and the cross-section of short interest explains the size-momentum pattern.

Simple trading strategy
The universe of stocks is built on all common equity listed on AMEX, NYSE, and NASDAQ (share codes 10 and 11 and exchange codes 1, 2, and 3.).
(The Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database contains data about firm stocks.)

Calculation: Compute the relevant metric SIR (the short interest ratio) using prices and shares outstanding data from the CRSP Daily Stock Files.

Execution: The strategy is constructed using the winners with SIR specified in each row and losers with SIR indicated across the columns: long (buy) winners within the lowest short interest quintile W (S1) while simultaneously taking a short (sell) position on losers characterized by the highest short interest L(S5). (In other words, perform a zero-cost strategy formed by going long on stocks in the top momentum tercile and short on those in the lowest tercile.)

The strategy is monthly rebalanced, and portfolios are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The mixed results in mitigating financial crash/crisis in equities, with-caution approach -> paper argues that momentum profits may compensate for risks related to liquidity and funding risk spikes during crashes (Asness et al., 2013). However, they point out that this channel finds it difficult to fully explain the magnitude of these abnormal returns. The analysis reveals limited drawdowns, with notable exceptions during the Great Recession and the COVID-19 pandemic. Since shorting capacity returns, the feedback loops reverse, leading to cascading crashes However, these drawdowns are comparatively smaller than those experienced by a simple long position on the S&P500.