The shorting activity level is continuously rising, and it has an impact on the financial markets. Frequently, short-sellers are recognized as informed investors, that want to exploit their knowledge and arbitrage the deviations from the fundamental values. However, there seems to be only a weak relationship between the change in short-selling activity and stock returns.
Novel research shows that the shorting activity’s actual level might not be sufficient and does not bear that much information. The reason is that the short-interest ratio is highly variable across stocks and is largely persistent. Therefore, it is hard to identify any mispricing based on the short-interest ratio alone. The authors rather suggest examining the change in the short interest, which is defined as the demeaned short interest ratio divided by the standard deviation. As a result, the metric can identify the relative changes in the short-interest ratio. The relative change, which is called the surprise in short interest, is more informative than the actual level and can successfully identify the mispricing and the informed short selling. Naturally, such a result can be a base of the trading strategy that follows the smart short sellers. Therefore, the proposed strategy shorts the stocks with the largest surprises in short interest and goes long stocks with the lowest surprises.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the logic behind the surprises in short selling. The short interest ratio has a great variation across the firms, but this still is not informative about the informed short selling, because the levels of short interest are highly persistent over time. Therefore, both short-term mispricing and informed short selling are tough to identify by the level alone. Moreover, some firms exhibit a greater variation of the shorting activity than others, so also the simple change in the short interest is not sufficient. The authors suggest that not the absolute change, but the relative change is important to identify the informed short selling from the noise. If two stocks deviate from their stable short interest ratio levels by the same absolute value, the change for a stock which exhibits a lower variation should be more informative. Therefore, both the mean value of the short-interest ratio and volatility is essential. Scaling the demeaned short interest ratio by the inverse of the volatility ensures that it is possible to identify short-selling surprises by considering both changes and variation.
Additionally, the long-short strategy that exploits the surprises cannot be explained by asset pricing models, by other known short interest-based strategies or short-sale constraints. According to the research, based on the evidence, the surprise in short interest identifies the market mispricing, and it is a novel finding, which was not discovered before. Lastly, this mispricing persists because of the trading obstacles like iliquidity or information uncertainty.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all AMEX, NYSE, and NASDAQ stocks with share codes 10 and 11. Stocks with prices below 5$ and stocks below the 5th NYSE market capitalization percentile are excluded. The primary variable of the interest is the short-interest ratio, which is defined as the mid-month short interest over the number of shares outstanding (obtained from the Compustat database). At time t, for each stock, the surprise in short interest is defined as the demeaned short interest ratio divided by the volatility of the short-interest ratio. Both mean and volatility are calculated using past 12-months of data. Each month, stocks are sorted into deciles based on their surprise in short interest. Long the bottom decile (stocks with the lowest surprises) and short the top decile (stocks with the greatest surprises). The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy has slightly negative beta to market factor (although, only for the equally-weighted variant is the beta statistically significant). Performance during well-known crises can also be examined based on Figure 2.