In most ways, levered ETFs are similar to the traditional unlevered ETFs, although they have some unique features worth mentioning. Firstly, levered ETFs replicate their intended benchmark via derivatives. The creation and redemption process conducted between the levered ETF sponsor and authorized participants always includes cash in exchange for shares. Lastly, levered ETFs are popular publicly traded securities with individual traders that desire to engage in a levered bet, but with a lack of access to derivatives or margin. The data suggest that one could label the lever ETFs as ETFs tailored for speculative traders.
Moreover, levered ETFs, are a popular product among individual (novice) investors, and they can be used as magnified short-term bets on a basket of securities. Levered ETFs are ideal for studying the role of the speculation sentiment on asset prices. The primary market mechanism of ETFs can be used to measure fund-level arbitrage activity and also the direction. There is a pair of speculative claims with identical cash flows, one which is traded by novices – buying the ETF shares, while the other traded by the professionals – the ETF underlying securities. The relative demand shocks between the claims are observable and with the usage of the first levered ETFs offered to investors (ETFs sponsored by ProShares), a novel measure of speculation sentiment based on the arbitrage activity is provided – namely the Speculation Sentiment Index (SSI). The Speculation Sentiment Index is a proxy for market-wide speculation sentiment, predicts aggregate asset returns and lastly, it is related to the mispricing, and arbitrage activity across asset markets. Research provides direct and credible evidence that speculative trading pushes asset prices away from their fundamental value, and the SSI offers an insight into the trading motives of non-professional speculative traders. If the SSI number is large and positive, non-professional speculative traders heavily demanded long levered exposure to equity indices. As a result, ETF share prices drift above NAVs leading to arbitrage opportunities. On the other hand, if the number is large and negative, the non-professional speculative traders heavily demanded levered short exposure. No surprise, profitable investment strategy can be based on the facts mentioned above, a trading strategy that entails a long-short equity portfolio in which the equity sensitivities determine the long and short legs to SSI.

Fundamental reason
A lot of reasons support the theory that the leveraged ETFs are for speculative traders. Firstly, leveraged ETFs achieve their intended objectives well over short horizons, but they act poorly over the long horizons. Secondly, leveraged ETFs includes direct and indirect costs that are relatively bigger than comparable, but unlevered ETFs. Nextly, leveraged ETFs have relatively smaller institutional ownership than unleveraged ETFs and leveraged ETFs trade at much higher volumes than unleveraged ETFs. Lastly, leveraged ETFs are small, niche products designed for a particular investment motive (speculation). When comparing the SSI to the other existing sentiment proxies, the correlations between these existing sentiment proxies and the Speculation Sentiment Index are very low. Looking at the set of sentiment proxies, only the correlation between SSI and market-implied volatility is statistically di?erent than zero. Moreover, the correlations between SSI and the other proxies are less than 0.10, with just only one exception of the correlation, which comes in at just above 0.10. Another important difference is that most sentiment proxies measure a magnitude of sentiment, but they do not necessarily measure the direction. SSI provides both and adds a glimpse into the demand shocks of speculative traders. When the index is large and positive – speculative traders are heavily buying long exposure to equities and when the index is negative, and its magnitude is large – speculative traders are heavily buying short exposure. The Speculation Sentiment Index measures non-fundamental demand shocks that temporarily displace asset prices and give rise to the return reversals what leads to forming a profitable strategy – the betting against Speculation Sentiment.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE stocks. The index is constructed using six of the eight original levered ETFs offered by ProShares. Three levered long ETFs (QLD, SSO, and DDM) and three levered short ETFs (QID, SDS, and DXD). Each long-short pair tracks an intended index: QLD and QID provide 2x exposure to the NASDAQ-100 index, SSO and SDS provide 2x exposure to the S&P 500 index, and DDM and DXD provide 2x exposure to the Dow Jones Industrial Average.

Considering a set of the six levered ETFs, J denotes the subset of long ETFs and K denotes the subset of short ETFs. In each period t, ETF i’s percent share change is computed as minus one plus the fraction of SOi,t and SOi,t-1. SOi,t is the ETF’s shares outstanding in period t. If percent share changes are computed for each of the six ETFs comprising the index, the net at time t (the first stage of period t’s index level) is computed as a difference of two sums where the first for every i in J sums the ETF i’s percent share change in period t and the second which sums for every i in K the ETF i’s percent share change in period t.

The final step in forming the index is to estimate net at time t as an AR(1) process, where net at time t is equal to the a plus net at time t+1 multiplied by gamma plus SSI t, where a is a constant, gamma is the AR(1) coefficient on net t+1, and SSI t is an independent and identically distributed Gaussian innovation to the index. After estimating the parameters a and gamma, the series of innovations, SSIt+i {SSI1,…, SSIT}, are calculated as the residuals. This time series of residuals form the Speculation Sentiment Index.

The strategy itself begins with the set of all NYSE traded stocks and the time series of SSI t. For each stock, monthly sensitivity to lagged SSI t+i is estimated using rolling 36-month windows. Each stock’s sensitivity is estimated using the regression, where r i,t is the monthly return on stock i in month t and its equal to the a (the regression intercept) plus SSI t+1 (the lagged one month value of SSIt) multiplied by stock i’s sensitivity to lagged SSI t on a date i based on the previous 36 months of data) and plus epsilon i,t (the error term).

In each month ?, individual stocks are sorted into quintiles based on that month’s sensitivity to SSI. A long-short portfolio is constructed only with the usage of the quintiles one and five. The position in the long-short portfolio depends on the previous month’s realization of SSI. If SSI is positive at t+1 the long-short portfolio formed at date t+1 consists of the fifth quintile forming the long leg and the first quintile forming the short leg, and if SSI is negative at t+1 the long-short legs are flipped.

The magnitude of SSI scales the portfolio itself, so if the absolute value of SSI is small, the exposure of the portfolio is small, and a fraction of the portfolio is held in cash. When the absolute value of SSI is large, the exposure of the portfolio is increased using leverage. SSIt is normalized so that the average leverage is equal to zero. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.