The options markets are usually used by sophisticated, informed traders; therefore, information from this market about implied volatility for put and call options (and their difference) could be used to measure price pressures on individual stocks. Price pressure could then be used to predict stocks that are more likely to appreciate (depreciate) due to greater (lower) investor interest. A portfolio that is long on stocks with relatively expensive calls (stocks with both a high volatility spread and a high change in the volatility spread) and short on stocks with relatively expensive puts (stocks with both a low volatility spread and a low change) earns statistically significant returns. The effect is robust when Fama and French factors, a momentum factor, and skewness factor are incorporated.

Fundamental reason
Predictability seems to reflect informed trading, with informed investors trading first in the options market. Information from option prices is then only gradually incorporated into stock prices alone.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks with liquid and actively traded options. The implied volatility of each option for each stock is computed from Wednesday’s closing prices each week. The volatility spread (the difference between call and put implied volatilities) is calculated as a weighted average spread (by using open option interest) between calls and puts valid pairs across strikes and maturities.

Then every Wednesday, the investor sorts firms independently into five categories based on the change in the volatility spread between Tuesday and Wednesday and into five categories based on the level of the volatility spread on Tuesday (5×5=25 portfolios altogether). The investor then creates a long/short hedge portfolio (on Thursday morning) that buys stocks with both a high Tuesday volatility spread and a high Tuesday to Wednesday volatility spread change and sells stocks with both a low Tuesday volatility spread and a low Tuesday to Wednesday volatility spread change. Stocks are value-weighted, and the portfolio is rebalanced weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.