Recent years brought back the question of sustainability and progress around the world and revival with responsible investing in form of ESG (environmental, social and governance) ratings. The concept is still widely studied and no definitive answers are given. Paper tries to answer the questions what are costs of excluding low rating ESG companies from portfolios and we construct strategy upon the findings whilst taking advantage of reversing such approach. Researchers use example of the Norwegian Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG –“The Oil Fund”), the world’s largest SWF (Sovereign Wealth Fund), and their widely accepted principles to find a set of firms with low ESG rankings. Study finds that portfolios constructed of these companies have a considerable significant positive excess return (alpha) as high as 5% in annual terms, relative to the predictions of standard asset pricing models, such as the global Fama-French five-factor model.

Fundamental reason
Main motivation of authors is to find out if investors preference in ESG companies cost them significant amount of alpha resulting in lowering their overall returns. Framework for calculation of portfolio performance is Fama-French international five factor model. Researchers presented two possible theoretical explanations of this phenomenon. First, a short-term price pressure hypothesis, that exclusions lead to selling pressure and a short-term underpricing, which will be corrected going forward, and lead to higher returns in the short-term, or second, a shift in expected returns, where low quality ESG firms have higher returns. First hypothesis is ruled out on basis that short term price pressure can not lead to return effects of presented magnitude. It is then concluded that sheer amount of the estimated alpha is due to changes in long term expected returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of excluded “sin” stocks (“bad ESG” firms). The source of data is from GPFG news releases and their Ethical council. A total of 189 companies have been in the portfolio throughout the 2005-2022 period at some point. We construct a long-only value-weighted exclusion portfolio, where the return of each excluded stock is weighted by its company market capitalization. International versions of the Fama-French factors are calculated from the equation on page 12. There are two simple rules for rebalancing the portfolio: a stock is included in the portfolio the month after the company has been excluded (so it appears on the fund’s exclusion list); on the other side, if an exclusion is revoked, the stock exits the portfolio at the end of the month of exclusion. The performance in the table is stated as “alpha”; therefore long-only portfolio is hedged by an aliquot short position based on Fama&French CAPM model.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The research paper reports “alpha performance”, so the strategy is hedged by shorting the overall market; however, we do not know if it can be used as a hedge as we do not know whether the “alpha” is not correlated to overall market performance.