Authors introduce a new firm-level measure, industry-relative stock beta (IRSB), that captures investors’ expectations by computing the discrepancy between a stock’s market beta and its industry beta. It is positively associated with future stock returns and is not driven by known risk factors or other return predictors. Positive relationship between belief measure of authors named IRSB and future returns is stronger among firms with a higher degree of extrapolation and during high extrapolation period. Results of univariate portfolio sorts show that stocks with high IRSB generate substantially higher future returns than those with the lower IRSB. And this main idea is utilized in our selected strategy from this research.

Fundamental reason
Investors are subject to extrapolate expectations and may form biased beliefs at the stock-level, which further exerts great cross-sectional impacts on stock returns. Mispricing in the stock market is caused by behavioral biases, and IRSB measure is showing strong predictive power, particularly for stocks that are difficult to arbitrage. The unique contribution of the paper is that the introduced measure provides unique information by comparing the publicly available data of individual stocks with those of their industry peers instead of belief proxies based on firm-specific characteristics. The firm’s macroeconomic risk exposure and financial risk do not significantly impact the predictability of this variable, making it a suitable, objective choice in thoughtful analysis and basis for various trading strategies and investment approaches. IRSB is linked to investors’ extrapolative expectations on recent positive news and upper-limit events.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks (traded) in Shanghai Stock Exchange and Shenzhen Stock Exchange. We exclude the smallest 30% companies (often regarded as shell stocks). (We can obtain stock price, return, and volume data from the China Stock Market Accounting Research Database [CSMAR]. The industry classification and index return data may be obtained from the website of SWS Research.)

The trading procedure goes as follows:
-1. Estimate the market beta of each stock (or industry) by regressing stock raw return on market return as by eqs. (1, 2) where the dependent variable R_t is the raw return of stock (or industry) in month t, and independent variables R_M,t are the market return in months t, t-1, and t+1, which are calculated by CSMAR value-weighted return minus the three-month deposit rate. To obtain a consistent estimate of beta (unknown parameters from regression [equation]), we aggregate the slope coefficients from a regression of the stock’s raw returns on the market return:
0. IRSB is defined as a stock’s observed market beta relative to its industry peers. Specifically, a higher (lower) IRSB would be a reflecting of more (less) irrational views held by investors for a given stock, and thus measure a larger (smaller) degree of investors’ belief biases. Eq. (3): IRSB_s,t = (β_s,t − β_i,t−1)/β_i,t−1 , in which β_s,t is the short-term market beta of stock s in month t, and β_i,t−1 is the long-term market beta of the industry i in month t − 1.
1. At the end of each month, stocks are sorted into decile portfolios based on their IRSB values, constructed using the procedure explained in previous steps.
2. Portfolio Low (High) contains the stocks with the lowest (highest) IRSB. The final portfolio is constructed as going long on (buying) portfolio High and going short ([short] selling) portfolio Low.

The final portfolio is scheduled to be rebalanced monthly (at the end of the month), and value-weighted

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not discuss possible applications in crises.