Innovative efficiency is a company’s ability to produce a maximum benefit on each dollar spent on research and development. Academic research shows that companies that are the most efficient earn the highest future returns, as they are the best in transforming those innovations into real output. Several measures could capture this factor, and measures that compare the number of patents granted to a company or the number of patent citations received, scaled by R&D capital or expenses, are easily enumerable and effective. A long-short portfolio could then be created by investing in the most efficient companies and shorting the most inefficient. However, caution is needed in a real-world implementation as this effect works best among small-cap stocks. On a positive side, this effect has a very weak correlation to other market anomalies (momentum, etc.) and could, therefore, be very valuable as a portfolio diversifier.

Fundamental reason
Research suggests that investors have great difficulty in processing information which is less tangible (or about firms which have highly uncertain prospects). Innovative efficiency (a firm’s ability to generate patents or citations per dollar of R&D investment) information is especially hard to process, hence investors will under-react to the information content in innovative efficiency because of this difficulty. Firms that are more efficient in innovations may be undervalued, whereas firms that are less efficient in innovations may be overvalued. An alternative theory states that firms with a higher innovative efficiency tend to be more profitable and have a higher return on assets and, subsequently, higher equity returns.

Simple trading strategy
Companies from the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ with a market capitalization smaller than the NYSE median (small-cap stocks) except financial firms, CEFs, ADRs, and REITs are part of the investment universe. Information about the number of patents granted comes from the NBER patent database. Several measures of innovative efficiency could be used, so we present the number of patents scaled by R&D expenses (2 years prior) as a primary measure. Stocks with at least one patent granted are divided into three groups based on the number of patents scaled by R&D expenses two years earlier. The investor goes long on stocks with the highest innovation efficiency and short on stocks with the lowest innovation efficiency. The portfolio is held for 12 months and then rebalanced.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Based on the source research paper (see Table 9), the strategy has a slightly negative correlation to the equity market. Hence, it is possible that strategy can be maybe used as a hedge/diversification to equity market risk factor during bear markets. An independent backtest is, however, recommended.

