The companies report their short-term future earnings or spendings with accruals – essentially, they can report an income from a sale, which didn’t take place yet, or declare expenditure that will only happen, say, next month. There are many reasaons why companies use accruals on their income statements, and for many reasons, this can be beneficial for them. However, there is a well-researched stock market anomaly connected to the accruals showing a negative correlation between the company’s accruals and the subsequent stock return.
Knowing this, the authors examine the relationship between accruals seasonality and stock returns. Even though it is expected that the seasonality of the accruals should be priced, they find that it is not the case in the US market. The investors in the stock market react to observed accruals information but do not anticipate it based on the seasonality. Seasonality of accruals can be estimated, and high accruals seasonality companies continue to have high accruals in the same fiscal quarter over the next five years.
The point is that seasonality can be used as a stock return predictor. Based on the accruals seasonality over the last five years, it is possible to predict the seasonality for the following month. Based on this measure, a hedge long-short portfolio can be created and rebalanced monthly based on the expected accruals.

Fundamental reason
The authors offer a relatively straightforward and concise explanation for the reason behind the accruals seasonality spread. In the post-2001 period, investors became aware of the accruals effect and tried to implement it. However, to this day, they generally don’t seem to predict the accruals information. Instead, they only react to it. As the authors say, accruals seasonality should be already incorporated into the price in an efficient market, which is obviously not. Therefore, if investors in the market don’t realize and implement the seasonal predictability of accruals, this strategy stays effective. It doesn’t have any risk-based explanation; the effect results from unsophisticated arbitrage of the accruals anomaly.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ non-financial stocks with files on CRSP. Stocks with share prices less than 5$ and missing market capitalization at the end of the previous month are excluded.
The sorting measure is accruals seasonality, AS for short. Consider AS over the previous five years every quarter. That means that in a fiscal quarter, look at the last 20 fiscal quarters ranking them based on the accruals during these quarters, in ascending order – the higher accruals, the higher rank. The AS measure will be the average rank of the same year quarters over the last five years. (So if we’re calculating AS for quarter q, and the last 20 quarters are q-23 to q-4, average ranks of quarters q-4, q-8, q-12, q-16, q-20).
Each month, only stocks with expected accruals in that month are sorted into a quintile portfolio. The expected accruals month is 12 months after the previous actual accruals date, and the date of the actual accrual is usually the day when the firm releases necessary information for calculating accruals. That would usually be a 10K/Q filing date, but occasionally it’s on a prior date before that. That means each month, a different set of stocks would be rebalanced.
Once you sort the stocks into quintiles, long the lowest and short the highest quintile. The strategy is value-weighted but capped at the 95th NYSE percentile of market capitalization.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - It seems that strategy is uncorrelated with the market factor (Table 7, Panel B), but a more detailed analysis should be made to examine the strategy during crises thoroughly.