The stock market’s expectation of volatility may contain helpful information in predicting future asset returns. At the same time, options markets have valuable information for forecasting. Therefore, the author used the options with different strike prices on each trading day to calculate the innovations in volatility and subsequently explored whether the market volatility risk is priced in China. This paper is the first to investigate how option information affects the cross-section of stock returns in China. According to Chang, Christoffersen, and Jacob (2013), innovations in market volatility are negatively contemporaneously correlated with market returns. The author (Zhen) confirmed the findings mentioned above, with a correlation coefficient of -0.12 for China, indicating that stocks with high exposure to volatility innovations can be used to hedge against market downturns. Lastly, the author created the trading strategy, telling us to calculate the exposures of stocks to innovations in market volatility (VIX beta) by running univariate regressions. And finally, sort stocks into deciles based on VIX beta, longing the decile with the lowest beta and shorting the decile with the highest beta.

Fundamental reason
As already mentioned, innovations in market volatility are negatively contemporaneously correlated with market returns. The main reason for this phenomenon is the leverage effect. The firm’s risk, measured by volatility, increases due to price fluctuations. If the price of an asset decreases as a consequence of an overreaction, investors would expect a reversal – the price reverting to its previous level. Therefore, the benefit from market volatility increases can compensate for the losses from investing in bear markets, making stocks with high exposure to volatility innovations desirable. Moreover, risk-averse investors dislike volatility, making high-volatility stocks pay more to attract investors and, therefore, have high expected returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of SSE 50 ETF options and stocks. The data come from the Wind financial database. Stocks that have been listed for less than one year are excluded.

Firstly, using the options with different strike prices on each trading day, for each day t, calculate the risk-neutral volatility VIX_t following equation (1) on page 7. Then, calculate its corresponding autoregressive moving average model (ARMA), and let the ARMA(1,1) residuals represent the innovations in market volatility (∆VIX).

Secondly, at the end of each month, obtain the exposures of stock i to innovations in market volatility. Run the following regression on the daily returns of each stock: R_t – R_f,t = β_0 + β_vix*∆VIX_t + ε_t (equation (8) page 10), where R_t is s the return of the stock on day t, R_f,t is the risk-free interest rate on day t, ∆VIX_t are the innovations in market volatility on day t, and ε_t is the residual on day t. β_0 and β_vix are the coefficients to be estimated. β_vix (VIX beta) represents the risk exposure.

Thirdly, sort stocks into deciles based on VIX beta. The first (last) portfolio contains stocks with the lowest (highest) beta. Weight each stock by its market capitalization at the end of each month, creating the value-weighted one-month ahead portfolio. Finally, long the top decile and short the bottom decile.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The paper’s finding suggests market volatility can be used to hedge against other risks in addition to market downturns. Stocks with high exposures to innovations in volatility or skewness can hedge against market downturns (a deterioration of investment opportunities).