The literature offers numerous factors that explain or even predict asset prices based on either fundamental past data or some return distribution characteristics such as skewness, min, max, volatility, etc. The novel research using Merton’s structural framework examines forward-looking factors stemming from asset return distributions implied by both equity and credit prices. The model of the paper accounts for the optionality in the levered equity, and the firm’s equity is valued as a call option on the value of assets. The research examines asset return and asset volatility, but this screener’s addition is related to asset volatility.
The asset’s return is based on the idea that the firm’s equity is valued as a call option on the value of the firm’s assets, where the option’s strike price is the face value of the debt. Similar to the options pricing, assets evolve according to the geometrical Brownian motion and (asset) volatility. Secondly, there is a CDS spread implied by the default threshold equal to the debt’s face value. We can estimate the implied asset value and asset volatility by calibrating the model’s call option, and CDS spread using the market’s stock prices and CDS spreads. The authors have found that a rise in unpriced asset volatility is connected with higher past stock returns but lower future returns. Therefore, asset volatility is an indicator of reversal and a negative predictor. The authors construct a factor based on the asset volatility conditional on the asset return that captures the difference between firms with increasing volatility and firms with falling asset volatility. The results clearly show that there is a significant and negative return. Consequently, the results support a strategy that buys stocks with falling asset volatility and shorts stocks with rising asset volatility.

Fundamental reason
The idea of why the strategy should work is based on one of the central hypotheses of the paper, that the future returns decrease with shocks (changes) in asset volatility conditioned on the asset returns. Moreover, asset volatility conditioned on asset returns is a predictor of future increases in idiosyncratic earnings volatility.
Several tests confirm this hypothesis: statistical tests and hypothesis testing, and an examination of the trading strategy based on the theory. Therefore, the changes in asset volatility negatively predict subsequent stock returns. For robustness, the paper shows that the common risk factors cannot explain this novel factor, and overall, the factor is tied to the firm fundamentals in the future. Lastly, although the performance is decaying with the increasing holding period, the decay is reasonably slow, and the strategy does not revert quickly, which is why we can consider this factor quite persistent.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX, or Nasdaq with a market cap of at least $100 million, a price of at least $1, and with single-name CDS contract with 5-year maturities. The asset’s return is based on a model that consists of a call option and CDS spread. The firm’s equity is valued as a call option on the value of the firm’s assets. The option’s strike price is the face value of the debt and assets evolve according to the geometrical Brownian motion and asset volatility. The CDS spread is implied by the default threshold equal to the face value of the debt. By calibrating the model’s call option and CDS spread using the market’s stock prices and 5-year CDS spreads, we can estimate the implied asset value and volatility using equations 6-9 on page 11. The firm’s asset return is equal to the 6-months change in Merton’s implied market value of assets, and the change in the asset volatility is equal to the 6-months change in Merton’s implied asset volatility. For a trading strategy, calculate the asset return and change in asset volatility for each stock and sort stocks into quintiles based on asset return. Secondly, within each asset return quintile, sort the stocks into quintiles based on the asset volatility. Based on these double sorts, long the bottom volatility quintile in each return quintile and short the top volatility quintile in each return quintile. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Probably not - Although the strategy has insignificant market beta (Table 7), visual inspection of the Cumulative wealth of $1 investment figure shows that the strategy would decline during widely-recognized crises (Figure 4).