Options on US equities typically expire on the third Friday of each month, which means either four or five weeks elapse between two consecutive expiration dates due to calendar differences (four weeks in about 65% of all months in the year and five weeks are the remaining 35%). The strategy is based on the fact that options that are held from one expiration date to the next to achieve significantly lower weekly adjusted returns when there are four weeks between expiration dates, not five weeks. This is caused by a strong mispricing effect in options markets.

Fundamental reason
Investors often appear inattentive to information that is relevant to stock value. The possible inattention to the exact number of days to expiration for short-term options has two explanations. First, options traders are assumed to be relatively sophisticated and more knowledgeable than average stock traders (trading options is more complex and entails more restrictions than trading stocks). Second, while firm-specific information embedded in financial statements or news releases requires some time and effort to process, the number of days to an option’s expiration is very easy to obtain and requires simply one’s attention. The fact that this information is not fully captured by options prices is quite puzzling and is indicative of a strong degree of behavioural investment. So the main reason is that as long as investors buy options that mature “in the next month” they are less likely to pay attention to the exact expiration date, whereas when buying options that mature “in this month” investors are more likely to look at the exact number of days to expiration. Investor inattention is therefore consistent with a stronger effect in the expiration month than in the formation month.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all US equity options maturing on the third Friday of a month except options with zero open interest and options with zero trading volume, as such options are illiquid. The portfolio is formed as a delta-hedged call portfolio that combines an option position withholding negative delta units of the underlying security. In the portfolios are included only options with moneyness (the ratio of the stock price to strike price) between 0.7 and 1.3. The option portfolios are formed on the third Friday of each calendar month when taking a short position with options that mature in four weeks during the next month and then hold these portfolios until maturity (on the third Friday of the next month). The portfolio is equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy is writing equity options and is highly correlated to long-only equity market factor, therefore, is not suitable as a hedge/diversification during market/economic crises.