The premise that an aggregate measure of investor’ sentiment affects prices through reversal effects is documented from a number of sources. One such source of this effect is proposed in the paper by Obaid and Pukthuanthong, where pictures from a prominent newspaper are taken and used to train a CNN model in order to construct a sentiment factor that is able to predict short-term reversal on stocks as well as their trading volume. This type of visual content is quite novel and has not been researched on such a level. This approach highlights the behavioral biases that are inherently present in investors’ decisions as the research shows that there is a level of ‘optimism’ and ‘pessimism’ embedded in the photos. They conjecture a picture itself does not contain information and therefore should be independent of the returns, but they show that this factor is indeed significant in their experimental framework. They use a pre-trained Google Inception model while altering the last layer in order to predict the probability a picture will have a positive or negative sentiment. This approach is a part of a larger trend of alternative data in connection with the predictivity of equity returns, and although the factor itself correlates with the volatility factor – it seems to be useful especially in times of elevated fear. This could be a useful technique for a quantitative approach to risk management, as shown by the tactical allocation strategy tested in the study.

Fundamental reason
Several studies from psychology suggest that visual content can be attention-grabbing, especially in the multimodal setting of today’s media. In this case, psychology directly links this behavioral effect and postulates that it is present also on a larger scale – affecting the investors’ expectations about the future price. The findings of the paper confirm the hypothesis that the visual content reinforces the negative sentiment in up to five days following the publication of the article, and so they create a pricing gap that can be exploited as an arbitrage trade. This immediately raises the question of whether the strategy is applicable on securities that are more difficult arbitrage – in other words, whether the strategy does not implicitly bet on the size or liquidity premia. This downside is indeed confirmed by the researchers, and so this creates a cost to arbitrage. This is of course, a well-known price that is paid for implementing such a strategy. However, an out-of-sample test shows a positive certainty equivalent return, suggesting that there are predictive benefits of the model relative to a historical average forecast as defined by this measure.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists only of the S&P 500 Index and a 30-day U.S. Treasury bill. The sample consists of Wall Street Journal articles collected from their subscription service and spans the period between September 2008 and September 2020. The headline, summary and associated photos are collected from sections related to economics – see page 11. Subsequently, a transfer learning approach is employed on the pre-trained Google Inception model, replacing the final fully-connected layer with a layer that predicts the probability of a picture having a positive or negative sentiment. For this task, the DeepSent data set is collected that contains the data on sentiment, and the model is trained using batch training with 100 photos per batch. The learning rate is set to be 0.01, and the data is split so that 10% is reserved for validation, 20% for testing and the rest for training using a random assignment. Flipping and scaling are used to enlarge the dataset, and regularization, dropout and label smoothing are used to limit overfitting and enhance the convergence. Then the PhotoPes continuous-time factor is constructed by summing the number of negatively predicted photos on a given day with uniform weights. In order to complement this factor, another factor is constructed using the textual data from the articles by using the CoreNLP sentiment tool from Stanford. This model also predicts a positive or negative sentiment, and the TextPes factor is constructed by again summing the indicator variable of a stock being predicted with negative sentiment at a given day and dividing by the number of articles. The portfolio is constructed using a simple heuristic to capture the short-term reversal. When both the PhotoPes and TextPes are above their historical mean, the strategy invests in SPY at the market close of the third day after this event and sell on the close two days later. If the strategy does not invest into the SPY, the strategy moves to the risk-free asset depending on the lagged value of the factors.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The strategy has a large and statistically significant factor loading on the market beta from the paper’s time-series regression in Table 7. On the other hand, based on figure 3, the strategy seems to perform well during crises – especially during the covid crisis where the performance is so good that it is even suspicious.