The source paper contributes to the on-going debates on profitability premium by providing firm-level empirical evidence using emerging China’s data and using a variety of profitability variables including the gross profit (GP), return-on-equity (ROE), and return-on-asset (ROA). In this strategy, we will use ROE as a profitability variable due to its most satisfying results with additional sort on market capitalization, which further enhances its return. Chinese firms with high profitability generate substantially higher future stock returns than those with low profitability. Moreover, this positive effect of profitability on returns is robust and stronger among firms with large capitalization.

The profitability premium is strong in the Chinese market and cannot be explained by the standard risk measures like market beta, size and book-to-market ratio. It remains strong after controlling for other important determinants of the cross-section of stock returns in the Fama-Macbeth regression analysis. Also, the forecasting power of profitability remains significant after including these controls, and it contains the highly positive predictive ability for subsequent stock return as shown by the large regression coefficients and t-statistics of regression analysis. In addition, majority of the profitability premium is from the long leg, i.e., the subsequent high abnormal returns from the high profitability firms, which is not consistent with the popular mispricing notion that the low return in the short leg should be stronger since overvaluation is harder for arbitrageurs to correct due to short-selling constraints. In summary, behavioral mispricing explanations are not supported by the evidence in the Chinese stock market.

Moreover, this positive effect of profitability on returns is robust and much stronger among firms with large growth. Profitability premium hence appears to be complementary for the famous size and value premiums and expand the investor’s investment opportunity set.

 

Fundamental reason
The profitability premium is the abnormal returns on the profitability long-short spread portfolios which long stocks with high profitability and short stocks with low profitability. Moreover, double sorts on profitability and market capitalization show that the predictive power of profitability on the cross-section of stock returns is robust for large firms. According to the q-theory with investment frictions, an expected stock return is equal to the expected marginal benefit of an investment divided by the current marginal cost of investment. Hence, the q-theory predicts that profitable firms should generate higher expected return than unprofitable ones after holding the investment rate fixed since profitable firms have a higher marginal benefit of the investment.

Following Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), the source paper constructed various portfolios by sorting investment universe into size groups and profitability quintiles based on gross profit, return on assets and return on equity. Analysis on these 30 portfolios is available at table 5 of the source paper. However, we picked the most profitable – long short portfolio, which consists of the largest firms sorted by return on equity. Average abnormal return of this portfolio is 2.81%, and its corresponding t-statistics from regressing the time series of portfolio’s excess return on the Fama-French (1993) three factors over our sample period is 6.58.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consist of the Chinese A-share stocks with accounting and returns data available traded on the main boards of Shanghai and Shenzhen, SME Board, and Chinext Board. Construct the long-short portfolio from 30% largest companies by buying (selling) the quintile with largest (lowest) profitability factor. Calculate profitability factor as a return on equity (ROE). Rebalance portfolio at the start of new month by end of month data or most recently announced quarterly reports respectively.

ROE is measured by the most recently announced quarterly firm’s total operating profit (OP) in quarter t divided by the average of total shareholders’ equity (TSE) in quarter t and the previous quarter t-1.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk, therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during time of market crisis.