The Post-Earnings Announcement Drift (PEAD) effect, i.e., the tendency for stocks to drift after a positive earnings announcement, is a well-documented anomaly covered by numerous academic research papers. A closer look into these papers shows another (even stronger) anomaly – the tendency for stocks with strong past earnings announcements (and earnings announcement returns) to rise during the days around the subsequent future announcements. The documented returns are around ~1% for a 3-day period, which makes this anomaly one of the strongest performers among documented anomalies. Implementing this strategy would probably be difficult as the strategy probably works mainly in the small-cap universe (like the PEAD effect too), and the investor needs to be able to handle a large number of transactions with a large number of stocks in daily intervals. But the strategy’s expected return is very promising.

Fundamental reason
The main explanations of PEAD are the investors’ under-reaction to earnings announcements and liquidity. The strategy is probably connected to PEAD; therefore, it likely shares these explanations too. This complicated strategy’s real-life implementation could be another reason why abnormal returns are documented in academic research and why these returns are still not arbitraged away.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks from NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ except financial and utility firms and stocks with a price of less than $5. Two factors are used: Earnings Announcement Return (EAR) and Standardized Unexpected Earnings (SUE). EAR is the abnormal return for a firm recorded over a three-day window centered on the last announcement date (in excess of the return on a portfolio of firms with similar risk exposures). SUE is constructed by dividing the earnings surprise (calculated as actual earnings minus expected earnings, and expected earnings are computed through a seasonal random walk mode with drift) by the standard deviation of the earnings surprises.

Stocks are sorted into quintiles based on EAR and SUE. Data from the previous quarter are used to sort stocks and to avoid look-ahead bias.

Investors then hold stocks from the intersection of the top SUE and EAR quintiles during the next future earnings announcement (3-day period starting one day before the earnings announcement and ending one day after the announcement).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as equity long-only. Therefore, it probably can’t be used as a hedge against market drops.

