Carry strategies were popular and profitable; however, nowadays, the profits of those strategies have evaporated. The idea is simple; in the past, borrowing in countries with low-interest rates and investing in countries with high-interest rates has been profitable. The carry trade profits as long as the currency does not depreciate by more than the interest rate differential. On average, throughout the history and across currency pairs, exchange rates have depreciated by less than the differential and on average, returns to carry have been positive. Following the 2008 financial crisis, interest rates generally declined in developed countries and the spreads between them compressed. Moreover, in the post-crisis sample (2008-2017), carry currencies have mostly been overvalued, and the carry trade has not performed well.
Novel research has dealt with the lack of functionality of the carry trade strategy. The results are promising, with some modifications the carry strategy works even in the post-crisis times. Firstly, the research has found that performance is stronger and on average, more consistent, and also more aligned with the cyclical behaviour documented in the past, if the carry trade is applied to a subset of the riskiest currencies. There may be even possibility how the investors may be able to anticipate and avoid some of the strategy’s occasional losses, using a dynamic strategy that would add some value. Past research has proved that a measure of market turbulence is effective at anticipating carry losses. The authors have successfully applied this technique to the carry strategy constructed from high-volatility currency pairs, where the usage of 30-day averages of turbulence scores would help to avoid turbulent markets and avoids losses. Although the turbulence measure can be viewed as complicated at first sight (see the simple trading strategy or the source paper), the computation is not hard as well as the interpretation. The turbulence is based on the Mahalanobis distance used to measure the similarity of a particular object to a sample of objects belonging to a group of known characteristics (for example currency pairs are objects and volatile markets as characteristics). To sum it up, the carry strategy with the usage of high volatility currency pairs with a dynamic approach of using the turbulence can be profitable even in the recent periods.

Fundamental reason
The risk premium hypothesis posits that carry profits should exist in equilibrium to compensate investors for the risk of loss. Risky currencies must offer high-interest rates to attract and retain capital. By contrast, safe haven countries whose currencies appreciate during troubled times need not offer high-interest rates; investors will naturally want to hold them for diversification purposes. More reasons why the traditional carry strategy should work can be found in the Quantpedia screener – FX Carry Trade strategy.
Spot rates often moved in favour of carry before the financial crisis and carry currencies were usually undervalued when the spot rates appreciated. The fact that carry currencies have been mostly overvalued in the recent sample may partly explain the strategy’s lacklustre performance. Nextly, a measure of network centrality showed that investor crowding in the carry trade contributes to both positive returns and subsequent crashes. This result supports the existence of behavioural factors. The paper conjectures that following long periods of stable and attractive returns for the carry trade leads investors to chase performance and increase their allocation. As demand increases, spot rates become overvalued and highly susceptible to a crash.
The reason for the usage of high volatility currency pairs is simple. The research has found that when the carry trade is applied to a subset of high volatility currency pairs, it exhibits the characteristics we expect for a risk premium where the risk-bearing rewards investors. By contrast, the carry trade applied to low-volatility currency pairs does not work. Since the financial crisis, the high-volatility strategy generates strong returns in line with its history, while the low-volatility strategy has had persistently negative returns. Last but not least, both past research and this novel one have proved that a measure of market turbulence is effective at anticipating carry losses. In this case, the strategy with the addition of market turbulence achieved lower volatility and therefore, a higher Sharpe ratio.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 45 G10 currency pairs. At the end of each month, obtain daily spot exchange rates, forward rates and implied interest rate differentials for each of 45 currency pairs.

Next, each currency pair is aligned such that a long position in a forward contract on that pair yields a positive interest rate differential. Rank the size of these interest rate differentials and identify the 27 pairs with the largest differentials. Additionally, define risky currencies based on daily spot return volatility computed on rolling two-year windows. According to the paper, the investor has to divide pairs into low and high volatility groups. Unfortunately, the authors did not mention which criteria was used to do that. Still, we logically assume that currencies are sorted in a way that nine currency pairs with the highest volatility form the high volatility portfolio and nine currency pairs with the lowest volatility form the low volatility portfolio.

Next, the market turbulence technique is applied to the carry strategy constructed from high-volatility currency pairs. Turbulence from daily currency returns is a result of matrix multiplication. For the simplicity, assume that vector A is a row vector of cross-sectional daily G10 currency spot returns versus the US dollar minus a row vector of daily average spot returns over the prior three years. S is the inverse of the covariance matrix estimated from the prior three years of daily returns and N is the number of currencies included in the calculation. Then, the turbulence a simple result of matrix multiplication between A and S and transposed A again (note that the multiplication must be in the correct order because of the dimensions), this results in one simple number which is divided by the N, what results in the turbulence measure. Lastly, take a rolling 30 day average of turbulence scores, computing the percent rank of this moving average versus its five-year history and invest notional values of 100, 75, 50, 25 and 0 percent in carry (but only in high volatility currencies) whenever the turbulence percent rank is above 0, 20, 40, 60, and 80 respectively. The strategy is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy is timing currency carry strategy, which is strongly correlated to equities; therefore, it is not suitable as a hedge/diversification during market/economic crises.