Investigating past negative or positive return frequency has become more discussed in recent literature. Especially the fact that the frequency of negative daily returns during the prior month may positively predict future monthly returns. But is the frequency of negative daily returns itself sufficient?

According to Tversky and Kahneman (1974), people tend to minimize the time necessary for making decisions. Therefore, they think binary – seeing return only as positive or negative without considering its size. Furthermore, Barberis and Huang (2001) claim that investors are unwilling to hold stocks with a high frequency of negative returns. Therefore, following the findings mentioned above, the authors (Koval and Steshkova) constructed a simple trading strategy (FL) telling us to buy stocks with a high frequency of negative returns and to sell the stock with a low frequency of negative returns. However, the paper shows that the performance of this simple strategy is not robust to various specifications.

Therefore, the authors applied the exponential weighting to the daily returns putting the greatest weight on the latest observations, creating an even more efficient trading strategy (WFL). The strategy tells us to buy stocks with a higher frequency of negative returns and to sell the stocks with a lower frequency of negative returns, using the exponential weighting of daily returns.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy is the heuristic thinking of the investors – they try to minimize the decision-making time, finding the most simple solutions instead of spending lots of time analyzing. Therefore, the authors did not examine the magnitude of the returns, only the number of positive and negative returns during the last month. Their findings suggest that people think binary – they split data into two opposite groups. In other words, they identify the return only as positive or negative without considering its size. Therefore, the high frequency of negative returns during the last month causes abnormal selling of the stock and its subsequent undervaluation. Furthermore, the authors observed that exponential weighting outperformed equal weighting – showing that the most recent information is the most important. Last but not least, the authors showed that the strategy’s return is more significant for the stocks held by retail investors, confirming the theory that retail investors tend to use simple heuristics when making investment decisions.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ-listed U.S. stocks. Stocks with prices below 1$ are excluded. The data come from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). To avoid outliers, winsorize the data at 0.5% and 99.5%. At first, for every stock i, determine the j-th daily return in month t. Next, calculate the weight of the return j of stock i in month t as w_j = exp[r(j-1)], where r = 0.13. Subsequently, calculate the relative weight of the return j of stock i in month t (w_(j,t)) following the equation (3.2) on page 8. Finally, calculate the weighted frequency of loss (f_(i,t)) for the stock i in month t following the equation (3.1) on page 8, which is based on counting the previous month’s exponentially weighted daily returns, but only from days when the returns were negative. At the end of each month t, stocks are sorted into deciles based on the weighted frequency of loss. Long the bottom decile (stocks with the highest weighted frequency of loss) and short the top decile (stocks with the lowest frequency of loss). The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - WFL strategy does not exhibit high draw-downs and grows steadily across the entire sample.