Momentum is one of the oldest and best-researched trading strategies. The theory states that stocks that have performed well in the past (“winners”) are inclined to continue to perform well. On the other hand, stocks that have performed poorly (“losers”) would continue in this trend. Many studies have examined the tendency of investments to continue in their performance utilizing the information about past returns. The authors (Zeng, Marshall, Nguyen, Visaltanachoti) added information beyond past performances to estimate the enduring momentum probability of each winner and loser. At the end of each month, they applied the Cox PH model to calculate the probability for each winner or loser to continue as a winner or loser for the subsequent six-month investment period. Moreover, they found a significant relationship between the enduring momentum probability and the persistence of stock returns. Finally, the authors constructed the enduring momentum strategy, telling us to buy the top ten past winners and sell the top ten past losers with the highest estimated enduring probability.

Fundamental reason
Momentum strategies are widely known and accepted among academics. The main reasons for their functioning are the irrationality of investors, behavioral biases like investor herding, or confirmation bias. However, the simple price momentum strategy is based only on past prices (it tells us to go long past winners and go short past losers). The authors constructed an enhanced momentum strategy utilizing firm characteristics to estimate the enduring momentum probability – the probability of each winner or loser to continue as a winner or loser. The enduring momentum strategy reveals a relationship between the enduring momentum probability and future returns that cannot be explained by price momentum signals. Last but not least, the enduring momentum strategy generates outstandingly higher profits than the simple price momentum strategy.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ-listed U.S. stocks. Stocks with prices below 1$ are excluded. Firstly, at the end of each month t, classify all the firms into ten equally weighted portfolios based on their past six-month returns. “Winners” (“losers”) – firms with the best (worst) past performance are in the top (bottom) decile portfolio. Secondly, using the Cox Proportional Hazard model (model used to estimate the effect of explanatory variables on survival), calculate the “enduring” probability for the subsequent six-month holding period (t+1, t+6). The model uses 37 firm characteristics (the full list is in Appendix 1) and is calibrated based on the enduring time (number of months for each winner (loser) to stay in the top (bottom) decile portfolio) over the time from previous sixty to six months. The mathematical model description is in the section 2.2.1. Go long the top ten past winners and go short the top ten past losers with the highest estimated enduring probability and hold this position for six months.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The original momentum factor performs well during the first stages of crises (as it usually shorts stocks with strong downward momentum and buys stocks which are not falling fast). Momentum crashes usually occurred right as the market rebounded following previous large declines. One explanation for this pattern is the time-varying systematic risk of the momentum strategy because momentum has significant negative beta following bear markets. This modification requires additional analysis to answer the “hedging question”.