Diversification, hedging, or simply insuring portfolio against drawdowns are key topics in the financial markets. Throughout history, both practitioners and academics have suggested many different assets (and asset classes) that could be used to hedge the equities to minimize the drawdowns or even benefit from them. Traditionally, these assets include safe-haven currencies such as the Swiss Franc or the Japanese Yen, gold, US treasuries and put options for the S&P500 index.
No doubt, all these assets, at some point in time, performed well as hedges. However, it is no guarantee that history would repeat itself.
The uncertainty mentioned above is the main motivation for constructing a diversifying portfolio that is thoroughly examined in the presented paper. The authors consider the traditional assets but also include a systematic multi-asset trend-following strategy. Considering these possible investments, they construct portfolios using either equal risk contribution or optimal risk contribution. The portfolios are constructed using in-sample drawdown periods and tested using out-of-sample periods with interesting results (drawdown reductions and profitability), but the paper also offers a full-sample performance examination. The main result is that both portfolios perform significantly better than any individual hedging asset. To sum it up, the results suggest that the well-known safe-haven assets should be considered only as a building block of a diversifying strategy.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, there are various reasons why the assets used for portfolio construction should act as diversifiers. Japanese Yen, Swiss Franc and Treasuries are usually connected with the increased leverage to risk assets during risky periods. All these assets act as funding instruments since they have a low cost of carry. Unwouding such trades and covering the implicit short position results in positive returns to the funding instruments. Although gold can be volatile, it is considered a long-term store of value, and thus, throughout history, gold was often considered to be a safe haven. Naturally, put options for equity index are insurance against equity drawdowns, and their hedging properties are intuitively understood. On the other hand, without active management, put options can be costly. Finally, a multi-asset trend-following strategy might also act as a hedge since it longs outperforming securities and shorts underperforming securities.
Secondly, the functionality is also caused by the insurance portfolio construction methods such as equal risk contribution or optimal risk contribution. The approaches should ensure that all the assets contribute equally (optimally) to the total risk.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of spot Swiss Franc, Japanese Yen and Gold, US long bond futures, 1-year 20% out of the money S&P500 put option and trend-following strategy based on the S&P 500 Index, the Swiss Franc, the Japanese Yen, spot gold, wheat, soy, and sugar futures, and US long bond futures that goes long assets with prices above their 252-days moving averages and goes short assets with price below their 252-days moving averages. Firstly, portfolios are constructed based on monthly returns and optimized on a randomly selected sample where the S&P 500 Index suffered drawdowns of more than 15% (strategies are evaluated on the full sample, though). Construct the portfolio using equal risk contribution, assuming zero correlation between assets in calculating risk contribution. Finally, the portfolio is constructed with a target volatility of 15%. The equal risk contribution is presented as a representative example. The equal risk contribution tends to act as a better hedge during equity drawdown sub-periods, but the optimal risk contribution has a better performance throughout the whole sample (including bull markets).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - The whole strategy is designed to be a hedge.