Momentum and reversal are some of the best-researched anomalies of the financial market. These effects have been found within many market classes, such as stocks, commodities, and currencies. The novel research by Ch. S. Jones, M. Khorram, and H. Mo propose that both the momentum and reversal effects can also be found within the options market, with an interesting finding that the presence is much stronger there. For example, their evidence shows that the Sharpe ratio is up to three times higher compared to the cross-sectional momentum strategy on stocks. Moreover, they offer significant evidence of seasonality and the presence of reversal. Since momentum, seasonality and reversal returns are mostly positively skewed, strategies tend not to have substantial drawdowns. The immense contribution of this paper is the evidence of reversal and momentum not being strongly linked.
The findings of the paper can be utilized in either momentum or reversal strategy based on the straddles and their past returns. This screener’s addition is related to the momentum (the reversal variant can also be found on Quantpedia). The momentum strategy trades zero delta straddles which are sorted into portfolios based on twelve months lagged returns with the most recent one month omitted from the signal´s calculation.

Fundamental reason
To explain their findings, Ch. S. Jones, M. Khorram, and H. Mo examine the relation between delta-hedged option returns and the gains from volatility swaps. Using the methods proposed by Bollerslev et al. to disentangle volatility shocks from risk premia in swaps, they find that momentum is mainly driven by underreaction to past shocks. On the other hand, seasonality is the consequence of unpriced seasonal variation in stock realized volatility (does not hold for implied volatility). The main difference between this novel paper’s approach and the rest of the academic papers is the computation of momentum signals based on the average return over the formation period. The benefit of this approach is that it reduces the impact of outliers which results in more symmetric momentum signals. When comparing strategies in terms of the average return spread and statistical significance, they found that using the widely used momentum strategy on lags 2 to 12 is the strongest. Moreover, the reversal is not present when considering more extended lookback periods (although the reversal is present in a short one month lookback period, which is another strategy in the Quantpedia’s screener). This is confirmed by their overall long-term findings of momentum, meaning that if the stock’s option performs relatively well in the past 6 to 36 months, it will perform well in the following month.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the options traded on the U.S. exchanges for common equity only and expire within the regular monthly cycle and available in the OptionMetrics database. The analysis is performed on the end-of-day bid-ask quotes. Moreover, stock prices, returns, trading volume, market capitalization, and adjustments from stock splits are sourced from CRSP. On the expiration date, two pairs of call and put options with maturity in the following month are picked out for each stock – the first pair is selected based on the positive open interest of both put and call options on the day they are chosen, the second pair is selected by the call delta which is required to be as close as possible to 0,5. After selection, the pairs that record call delta outside the range 0,25 and 0,75 are dropped, ensuring that only at-the-money options are targeted. From the residual pairs’ delta straddles are formed by assigning – a delta of the put option times the bid-ask midpoint of call weight to the call option and + delta of the call times the bid-ask midpoint of put to the put option (weights sum up to 1). Stocks are sorted into the quintile portfolios based on the average lagged returns in the twelve months formation period with the most recent month skipped. The computation of the momentum signal is based on the average return over the formation period instead of cumulative returns. The strategy consists of going long on the quintile with the highest return and shorting the quintile with the lowest return. Portfolios are held until expiration (1 month) – strategy consists of holding the zero delta straddles to maturity.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Probably - Based on the figure A2, the performance seems to be stable also during the well-known bear markets.