Research and development could have a very large impact on future firm values in case it is successful. But it’s very hard to quantify it. One interesting academic research paper comes with a thesis that, while future outcomes associated with R&D investment are uncertain, past information about firms’ success in R&D can give us insight into the potential for future success. Firms with a history of a high ability to translate R&D into sales revenue outperform peers, which invest heavily in R&D but have a history in which they were not able to increase sales. An equity long-short portfolio offers attractive returns with a low relationship to other known anomalies.

Fundamental reason
Academic research shows that the market consistently misvalues innovation in an ex-ante, predictable way. The market fails to incorporate the information of past successes when evaluating the likely efficacy of today’s investments.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks listed on the New York (NYSE), American (AMEX), and NASDAQ stock markets with prices higher than $5.

Every year the investor calculates the “Ability” measure, meant to capture how good a firm is at turning R&D expenditures into future sales. The “Ability” is calculated by running rolling firm-by-firm regressions on firm-level sales growth (defined as log(Sales t/Sales t-1)) on lagged R&D (R&D t-j / Sales t-j; where j=1,2,3,4,5). The investor runs separate regressions for five different lags of R&D (i.e., R&D from years t-1, t-2, t-3, t-4, and t-5) and then takes the average of these five R&D regression coefficients as the measure of “Ability”.

The investor then creates a long-short equity portfolio. He sorts stocks into quintiles based on “Ability” and into three parts based on actual R&D expenditures (low 30%, middle 40%, high 30%). He/she goes long on stocks that exhibited high “Ability” (top quintile) in the past, and that spend a large amount on R&D (top 30%), and short on stocks that exhibited low “Ability” (bottom quintile) in the past and that spend a large amount on R&D (top 30%). The portfolio is equally weighted and rebalanced yearly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.