According to the researches of Shanaev, Skorochodova, and Vasenin, LGBT CEOs have positive impact on their companies, which is reflected in outperformance of their stock prices. Study builds upon previous research and successfully tries to incorporate phenomena of “rainbow ceiling” and “rainbow cliff” in their examinations. Research found statistically significant alpha in portfolios consisting of such companies, even with underrepresentation sample and limited statistical power. Implementation of findings could be consisted as basis for another addition to socially responsible investment strategies.

Fundamental reason
Methodology of paper is expanding two previously known concepts. “Rainbow ceiling” is used to explain how discrimination based on conscious or unconscious biases from investors results in being of these companies undervalued. “Rainbow cliff”, on the other hand, states that small growth stocks which had poor performance in past, tend to rather acquire LGBT CEOs as compared to better performing ones. This suggest the implication of turnaround in profitability of these companies, which is then reflected in their stock prices appreciation. Study found that “rainbow ceiling” hypothesis can be confirmed fully, agreeing on that this can benefit both individual investor and society too; and “rainbow cliff” partly due to implications of closeted executives and data size.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks of corporates with LGBT CEOs listed in US markets. Sample of companies is formed from reputable sources with information such as coming out or open identification with certain minority. Annualized return is calculated by multi-factor asset-pricing model regressions based on Fama and French five-factor model as shown on equation from page 16. We construct value-weighted portfolio with varying upper exposure limits (where value weights exceeding the limit are capped at the bound, and other stocks are re-weighted according to the residual allocation) consisting only of going long these stocks, which is being actively rebalanced (whether there is new public info about CEOs acquired or revealed their LGBT orientation, long positions are entered, and existing ones proportionally adjusted; if they quit or change their orientation, long positions are exited, and weights of companies in portfolio accordingly changed).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is a long-only, and as such has a strong exposition to equity market risk, therefore it can’t be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.