This trading strategy is based on a theory called the Maximum Pain theory. This theory suggests that for various reasons (possibly including market manipulation), the market moves toward the stock price, where at the option expiration, most option holders would suffer financial losses – thus the name Max Pain theory. There is, however, a way to determine which strike price this is – so to predict what price the stock will gravitate towards at the expiration date.
The Max Pain theory has been proposed quite some time ago, so the biggest contribution of the authors lies in the market trading strategy they propose utilizing this theory. The simple logic is that if they predict the Max Pain variable at the right time, they can predict the future movement of the stock prices just before the expiration date. Then it’s enough to just construct a simple long-short strategy going long the stocks expected to gain value. The anomaly is differentiated from other known market effects, such as the clustering effect. The strategy is profitable and statistically significant, even though the effect is the strongest for small, illiquid stocks. Still, an interesting trading strategy with a rebalancing period of 1 week is proposed in this paper.

Fundamental reason
The Maximum Pain theory suggests that when the options’ expiration date approaches, the underlying stock’s price will converge to the strike price at which the total payoff of all options issued on this stock will be the lowest. So when we construct the Max Pain gain/loss measure from stocks’ options, we essentially forecast which stocks will gain value within the following week according to the Maximum Pain Theory. This most likely happens because the option writers will try to buy/sell stocks to move the price in a such a way that they lose the least money. The hypothesis is consistent with assumptions about stock manipulation, and other research that suggests that changes in the trading of options influence the prices of underlying stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks with share codes 10 and 11. Stocks with prices below $5 are excluded. Data for stocks is obtained from CRSP, and data for option prices are from the OptionMetrics IvyDB database.
The stocks are sorted into deciles according to the Max Pain gain/loss variable, the Max Pain for short. For the calculation of said sorting measure, the Max Pain strike price needs to be calculated first. This might appear slightly confusing at first and is described in more detail in the appendix of the paper. Nevertheless, the Max Pain strike price is calculated in the following way: Assume that all issued put and call options are held by a single market participant. For every strike price at a given expiration date, calculate the potential total loss of this single market participant if the options expired when the stock price matches said strike price. The strike price where the total loss is the lowest will be the Max Pain strike price.
To get the sorting variable Max Pain, just calculate the difference between the Max Pain strike price and the stock price on the second Tuesday of the month (one week before the options’ expiration), divided by the stock price on that day. Sort the stocks into deciles, long the highest Max Pain decile, short the lowest. Rebalance after one week when options reach their maturity.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - does not apply; Strategies’ results should be predictable and not influenced by macroeconomic situations.