Quality factor is a well-known, but a quite complex factor in the world of finance. In contrast to the other traditional equity factors, there is only a very weak consensus among the researchers as to how it should be defined. That is because the quality of a company is not something easily extracted from the market data. However, once identified, these companies ought to perform well especially during crises and bear markets.
In this research, authors present their original way of identifying quality factor in equities, finding an ideal middle between strengths of academic research and constraints practitioners face while trading. They conclude their research on recent 18 years, well-developed markets sample. They perform tests for both long-short and long-only strategies, with the goal to offer investors proper insight into the profitability. The quality factor itself is calculated by considering 4 different and robust pillars – profitability, earnings quality, safety, and investment. Combining them into a single z-score allows the investor to sort the stocks and go long the ones with the highest quality. The 4 dimensions themselves complement each other and their combination gives rise to a significant trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
The authors believe that the source of the quality premium is the combination of both risk-factor and behavioral bias. Because of its nature, quality is multidimensional and difficult to properly capture. The authors offer a complex model made from 4 well-documented quality measures, each described by 2 carefully selected metrics. All of them have been subject to academic research before, which confirmed their ability to predict stock performances. However, at the same time, the quality premium generated by this strategy isn’t driven by any single one of these components, rather by the combination of them. At the same time, by choosing two metrics instead of one for each pillar, probability of misclassifying a stock is significantly lowered. The choice of large and mid-caps and using only recent years samples ensures up-to-date results useful for investors willing to implement this strategy in practice.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of large and medium-cap equities belonging to the MSCI standard indices on developed markets, financial and real estate companies excluded. For the rest of them, firstly calculate the quality score as follows:
For each of the four dimensions, there are two metrics:
Profitability – Gross Profit-to-Assets (GPA), Cash Flow Return on Investment Capital (CFROIC);
Earnings Quality – Sloan Accruals (WCAcc), Cash Flow Accruals (AccCF);
Safety – Long-Term Debt-to-Equity (LTDE), Working Capital-to-Assets (WCA);
Investment – Asset Growth 1-Year (AG1Y), Capex-to-Sales (Capex).
Firstly, calculate the value of each metric (see equations in section 3 of the research paper) and convert them into percentiles. Of course, the highest quality company should have the highest percentile. Combine two metrics into the value of the dimension by averaging their percentiles into a new single percentile for the dimension. Convert it into a z-score using an inverse normal distribution function and average all 4 of them to get one quality score. Secondly, create a quintile value-weighted portfolio sorted according to the quality score value. Long the highest quintile, short the lowest. The strategy is quarterly rebalanced.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Quality factor is often regarded as a hedge during bear markets. The global quality factor has insignificant market beta and some implementations (Europe ex-EMU, Japan or Asia ex-Japan) even have significantly negative betas (Table 2). The outperformance is during bear markets is also obvious from Figure 2.