Parent-subsidiary relationships (two public firms where one firm, the parent, owns partial equity of the other, subsidiary) are really common in equity markets. A new academic paper by Li, Tang, Yan has investigated the cross-sectional predictive relations between stock returns of these parent and subsidiary companies. They have found that high past returns of the subsidiary (parent) predict high future returns of the parent (subsidiary). Increase in the stock return of the subsidiary in portfolio formation month leads to a significantly higher stock return of the parent in the subsequent month. The subsidiary-to-parent predictability does not exist before the ownership is established, remains intact after controlling for a variety of stock characteristics (including market beta, size, book-to-market, momentum, stock reversals, illiquidity ratio, idiosyncratic volatility, co-skewness measure, analyst dispersion, analyst coverage, earnings surprise, institutional investor holdings etc.), and is stronger among stocks with higher barriers to arbitrage and a lower degree of investor attention.

Fundamental reason
The academic paper states that the barriers to arbitrage and limited investor attention on the parent stock could cause delayed reaction of the parent stock to the public value-relevant information of its subsidiary.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed at NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ with a price over $5 or less than $1,000. Each month, investor sorts parent stocks into five quintiles based on their subsidiaries’ realized stock returns in a previous month. Investor goes long parent stocks with a performance of subsidiaries in a top quintile and goes short parent stocks with a performance of subsidiaries in a bottom quintile. The portfolio is equally weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.