Expected investment growth (EIG) is a strong predictor for investment growth and also for the cross-sectional equity returns. A measure of the unobserved investment plan, the expected investment growth, is forward-looking and could contain important information about the expected return. The EIG is constructed from the cross-sectional regression of investment growth on the prior 2-12 month stock return (i.e. momentum), q and cash flow. Consistent with the assumption that firms with better stock and accounting performance (momentum and cash flow) and greater growth opportunities (q) are likely to have more future investment, all three predictive variables are positive and highly significant when constructing the EIG. But it is not one specific variable but the interaction between all of them that generates such strong return predictability of EIG. EIG is computed in two steps. In the first step, there is a need to run the cross-sectional investment growth predictive regression for every year (the formula on page 6). In the second step, the EIG is computed as the out-of-sample predicted value of investment growth from this formula. The EIG factor is then used to sort stocks into deciles and to form a long/short investment portfolio.

Fundamental reason
There exist two different ways to explain the large EIG premium: a risk-based and a behavioural explanation. On the rational side, the strategy is highly procyclical with respect to aggregate consumption growth. Specifically, in a two-factor model time series regression with the market excess return and aggregate consumption growth as the risk factors, the return of low EIG stocks has a negative consumption beta whereas the return on high EIG firms has a positive consumption risk exposure. The estimated coefficients suggest that while the payoff of the low EIG portfolio is countercyclical, its consumption beta is strongly procyclical: the consumption exposure of low EIG firms is especially more negative in bad times when the risk premium is high. The behaviour of low EIG stocks provides an effective hedge for business cycle fluctuations and the risk premium demanded by investors would be low or even negative compared to high EIG firms. On the behavioural side, the low EIG stocks show a similar feature as lottery-like assets. If investors have a strong preference for a lottery, these stocks could have been overpriced and have lower returns in the future. With high information uncertainty, investors’ investment decisions tend to be more affected by their behavioural biases such as lottery preference.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of decile EIG portfolios for subsamples of firms. It uses the all-but-micro subsample which excludes stocks smaller than 20% of the NYSE size cutoff at the portfolio formation month. First of all, investor computes the EIG factor through the formula on page 8 at the beginning of every month. The formula is a cross-sectional investment growth predictive regression with EIG as the main dependent variable and momentum, cash flow and market value (q) of the firm as independent variables. Values are then updated every month to compute the actual value of EIG. Each month then investor sorts stocks based on the computed EIG into deciles. In decile 1 are the stocks with the lowest EIG and in decile 10 are the stocks with the highest EIG. The portfolio goes long, decile ten and short decile 1. The portfolio is monthly rebalanced and equally weighed.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.