In recent years, the percentage of stocks in the market held by institutional investors has dramatically increased. That’s why, as the author mentions, it is important to be able to understand the institutional investors’ behavior well. It has been shown in multiple studies that it is often very different from the behavior of retail investors. It is reasonable to assume that different investor behavior projects into differences in the market. The author finds that this division – whether the stock is held mostly by retail investors or institutions, creates a difference in which factors are priced in it. On average, macro-related factors are priced in the stocks with high institutional ownership. The macro-related factors are innovations of macro variables, which can affect future investment opportunities according to the ICAPM. On the other hand, in stocks with higher retail ownership, the so-called characteristic factors are more prevalent. Characteristic factors are long-short portfolios sorted on firm characteristics. In this paper Fama-French factors, q5 factors, mispricing factors, AQR quality factor, gross profitability factor, and momentum are studied. Therefore, in low residual institutional ownership group, the characteristic factors generate a high return premium. By constructing a composite strategy for the 11 macro-related factors, a significant long-short trading strategy is obtained.

Fundamental reason
In classic fundamental financial models and theories, institutions are more likely to behave as rational, risk-averse investors, and make decisions less influenced by behavioral factors than retail investors. This is consistent with the idea that, essentially, macro-related factors proxy for risk, while the characteristic factors proxy for mispricing in the market.
Therefore, in stocks held mostly by retail investors, factors capturing mispricing (characteristic factors) will be priced. This conversely means that, in these stocks, risk (macro-related factors) won’t be priced as well as in the stocks held mostly by institutional investors. A low residiual institutional ownership (RIO) portfolio characteristic factors generate a significant premium, larger than in a group of high RIO stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks. Data on institutional ownership is extracted from WRDS Thomson Reuters Institutional (13f) Holdings database. If a stock is reported in the CRSP, but there is no data to institutional ownership, are assumed to have this value 0.
This strategy is a composite of the factors studied in the paper. There are 12 characteristic factors in this strategy:
Size (SMB), Book-to-Market Ratio (HML), Momentum (MOM), Investment (CMA), Profitability (RMW), Investment-on-Assets (RIA), ROE (RROE), Expected Growth (REG), Gross Profitability (PMU), Managements (MGMT), Performance (PERF), Quality (QMJ). Data sources and details are described on pages 10 and 11.
For each of these factors, for each stock, calculate the factor beta following the regression on page 12, using the data from the previous 5 years. Based on this, assign the stock a beta percentile ranking. Once this is done for all factors, calculate the beta percentile average for every stock. Sort the stocks into quintiles based on this value. Independently, sort the stocks into quintiles according to their residual institutional ownership (RIO), calculated using the regression (2) on page 7. In high RIO portfolio, short the highest quintile, long the lowest, and in the low RIO portfolio,short the lowest quintile, and long the highest. The strategy is equally-weighted and rebalanced quarterly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known -