The differential in trailing equity market performance across countries strongly predicts the cross-section of currency returns. Specifically, exchange rates tend to appreciate for countries that have had the strongest equity returns in the preceding year. Implementable portfolios formed on this equity differential factor generated a return‐to‐risk ratio superior to the traditional carry, trend, and valuation‐reversion factors in currencies since 1990. The equity differential factor cannot be explained by these traditional strategies and produces a statistically significant alpha in excess of them. Moreover, the factor has performed remarkably consistent over time, including in recent years, and it is robust to many different formulations. The cross-section of currency returns has been studied far less than that of equities, and evidence of a strong link between the two markets is even rarer. This equity differential factor can be implemented easily and practically via ranked currency portfolios.

Fundamental reason
The interest rate differential between two countries is a strong predictor of future profits; however we do not use interest rates. Instead, we determine currency positions based on trailing 12‐month equity index returns for each country. Equity index returns are merely used to indicate which currency positions to take. This “equity differential” strategy is implemented by entering into forward contracts to buy currencies associated with high recent equity returns and sell currencies associated with low recent equity returns. Currencies associated with high recent country equity returns subsequently outperform those with low equity returns. This result is surprisingly consistent and robust. Suppose that long‐run equity premiums are higher for some countries due to their inherent risk. Those countries will reward equity investors with higher local returns. How will they affect currency returns? To the extent that currency risk and country equity risk are related, we might expect to see higher interest rates in the riskier country.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all 45 currency pairs comprised of the G10 currencies. Calculate the differential in trailing 12‐month equity index total returns, denominated in local currency units, as of the end of the previous month for each pair. Re‐orient (flip) each currency pair to represent a positive equity differential. Allocate equal weight to each pair (or, alternatively, for a subset of pairs with the largest size differential) and net the currency exposures across pairs to arrive at a final set of currency weights. Record the subsequent month’s performance of the factor portfolio, assuming implementation with one‐month currency forward contracts and move to the next month and repeat.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.