The momentum strategy is one of the foundational factors used in advanced portfolio construction. It is present within stocks, all other major asset classes, equity sectors and industries and recent academic research show that it can be found even among trading strategies themselves ( systematic equity long-short investment factors). Suggested factor momentum strategy described in the source paper written by Arnott, Clements, Kalesnik, and Linnainmaa, uses 51 factors identified in the literature as significant predictors of stock returns. It is a cross-sectional strategy, which selects equity factors based on their relative past performance – it buys factors with positive prior one-month returns and sells factors with negative prior one-month returns. The resultant performance is highly statistically significant (t-stat over 5) and the same strategy using industry-adjusted factors earns even higher returns with even higher t-statistic (over 5.5).

Fundamental reason
Equity factors exhibit momentum in a similar way to that found in industry portfolios, and moreover, factor momentum fully subsumes industry momentum and momentum found in the cross-section of portfolios sorted by size and book-to-market (but not vice versa). This characteristic makes the factor momentum stronger. Factor momentum remains strong even when controlling, at the same time, for stock price momentum, industry momentum, and the five factors of the Fama-French model. Factor momentum is not due to any one factor. Almost any set of equity factors displays economically and statistically significant amounts of factor momentum. Factor momentum is also robust to implementation restrictions. The effect remains significant even when the factors trade only big stocks, or when a delay between the formation and holding periods is introduced.
Factor momentum’s abnormal returns are not specific to any one part of the 1963-2016 sample period. Whereas industry momentum “stops working” around the year 2000, post-2000 factor momentum is indistinguishable from pre-2000 momentum. Moreover, whereas stock momentum suffers crashes (Barroso and Santa-Clara 2015; Daniel and Moskowitz 2016), factor momentum experiences positive spikes. When stock momentum crashed at the onset of the market recovery in 2009, factor momentum generated sudden and outsized profits.

Simple trading strategy
Investment universe consists of NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq stocks. As a first step, investor constructs each factor from Table 1 as an HML-like factor by sorting stocks listed on the NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq into six portfolios by size and return predictors (51 equity factor strategies in total).
Let’s show an example of how a one factor strategy out of 51 is built. The investor uses NYSE breakpoints – median for size and the 30th and 70th percentiles for the return predictor – and uses independent sorts in the two dimensions. The exceptions to this rule are factors that use discrete signals. The high and low portfolios of the debt issuance factor, for example, include firms that did not issue (high portfolio) or did issue (low portfolio) debt during the prior fiscal year. The investor then computes value-weighted returns on the six portfolios. A factor’s return is the average return on the two high portfolios minus (high portfolio among both big and small companies) that on the two low portfolios (low portfolio among both big and small companies). In assigning stocks to the high and low portfolios, investor signs the return predictors so that the high portfolios contain those stocks that the study identifies as earning higher average returns. The accounting-based factors are rebalanced semi-annually at the end of each December and June, and the return-based factors are rebalanced monthly.
Then, each month, investor ranks equity factors by their average returns over a prior period and then takes long (short) positions in the best (worst) 8 performers out of mentioned 51 factors. The portfolio is equally weighted in each selected factor.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Yes - Daniel and Moskowitz (2016) and also Barroso and Santa-Clara (2015) shows that when momentum crashes, factor momentum experiences positive spikes and at the market recovery in generates outsized profits.