In the recent past, the idiosyncratic tail risk was already studied by numerous academics. It is well-established that the idiosyncratic tail risk is connected with premium. However, it is not clear what drives this effect. This novel research confirms that stocks with high idiosyncratic tail risk earn higher average returns than stocks with low risk. Additionally, the paper provides novel possible explanations about drivers of this effect and use a new distinct measure to identify the tail risk.
The research does not opt for the option-based measures of the risk since it requires a large dataset of option prices but rather extracts the needed information from the high-frequency data. The approach estimates the high-frequency Fama French Five-factor model and considers the residuals as the idiosyncratic returns. Finally, the Hill estimator is used to establish the idiosyncratic tail risk. Overall, this approach is supported by the extensive theory presented in the paper.
The idiosyncratic tail risk calculated using high-frequency returns could be extrapolated to longer time horizons. Connecting it to the well-accepted premium mentioned above directly leads to a trading strategy that systematically buys the high tail risk stocks and shorts the low tail risk stocks.

Fundamental reason
The past explanations of idiosyncratic tail risk premium include underreaction to firm-specific news, inability to diversify or limits to arbitrage. The author offers a risk-based explanation. According to the paper, the tail risk can be explained by intermediary funding and the common idiosyncratic tail risk factor, which correlates to the wealth of intermediaries’ marginal utility. Additionally, high tail risk stocks are largely exposed to the common idiosyncratic tail risk factor, thus earning a premium because of the lower returns during intermediary constraints tightening.
Additionally, the idiosyncratic tail risk is highly persistent and cannot be explained by common factors such as market, size, value, profitability, investment or momentum. The premium does not disappear when the sorts are made conditionally on other firm characteristics, and the strategy is robust to the tail risk estimation method or a different factor model for estimation of idiosyncratic returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks with prices above 5$ (share codes of 10 and 11) listed on NYSE, AMEX, NASDAQ and other U.S. regional exchanges. The data is from Trade and Quote, CRSP and Compustat databases. For the strategy construction, use the intraday returns with 5 minutes intervals. To ensure that there are enough left tail observations each month, the sample includes only stocks with at least 150 intraday negative returns.
Firstly, each month, consider regression where the high-frequency log returns for a given month and for each stock are explained by the high-frequency equity factor model (the paper uses the Fama French Five-Factor model; Appendix C provides more information about the HF factor model if needed). Therefore, the return is explained by multiple beta’s (for each factor) and factors. The errors are considered to be the unobservable idiosyncratic returns. Find the beta estimates using the Least Absolute Deviations estimator instead of the traditional OLS because of the heavy-tailed errors. Nextly, find the estimates of the idiosyncratic returns as the residuals of the model.
The idiosyncratic tail risk estimate is found using Hill’s method. As a first step, the idiosyncratic return estimates are ordered from the lowest to the highest. Secondly, find the threshold number Kt such that the idiosyncratic return number Kt plus one is the 0.05 quantile of the stock’s idiosyncratic returns the given month. Therefore, 5% of idiosyncratic returns are lower than Kt+1-th idiosyncratic return, and 95% of returns are larger than Kt+1-th return to ensure that only returns from the left tail are used. Finally, the tail risk estimate is equal to the sum from k=1 to Kt, where the sum consists of logarithms of k-th ordered idiosyncratic returns that are divided by the Kt+1-th idiosyncratic return. Additionally, the sum is divided by the Kt to obtain the “average” value (equation 17).
Each month, stocks are sorted according to their idiosyncratic tail risk estimates to the deciles. Long the top decile and short the bottom decile. The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy earns premium for a risk