The persistent asymmetry between protection demand and protection supply causes the implied volatility embedded in option prices to be on above-average future realized volatility in the majority of the asset classes. Variance swaps are considered to be the cleanest way of betting on the spread between implied volatility and future realized volatility as the final payoff of these contracts is simply the difference between realized variance and initially implied variance. The abnormal return that is embedded in variance swap contracts is typically called Variance Risk Premium. Trading strategies that are constructed in order to harvest the implied-to-realized spread on each asset can exhibit attractive risk-adjusted returns. These strategies could be improved by diversification into commodities, currencies, bonds and equities, which is the simplest way to reduce the risk of a portfolio without sacrificing potential performance.

Fundamental reason
Selling volatility can be risky, and therefore investors require a fair compensation to bearing drawdown risks. In Behavioral Finance, the role of investors decisions is crucial in understanding mispricing in financial markets. There are identified three behavioural attitudes that could cause variance swaps to be overpriced. Firstly, skewness aversion, when investors prefer high average returns and positive skewness, so they are more likely to buy protection using all the available financial instruments. On the other hand, the investor who is willing to accept negative skewness requires to be sufficiently compensated for it. Secondly, the requirement of meeting value-at-risk level, reducing drawdowns and preventing shortfalls make long variance swap contract an attractive hedging instrument. Finally, investors typically buy capital guaranteed notes more than bet on a long put option. All these arguments suggest that the demand for protection is on average above the supply of protection, so the premium is above the fair price. Also, the margin requirements create another asymmetry between supply and demand pushing implied volatility even higher.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 15 indexes across 4 asset classes (equity = S&P500, Russell 2000, EURO STOXX 50, Nikkei 225, EEM ETF, EWZ ETF and HSI; commodity = USO ETF – Crude Oil ETF, GLD – Gold ETF and SLV – Silver ETF; forex = EURUSD, GBPUSD and YPYUSD; bonds = 10-year Treasury Notes futures). The investor shorts the portfolio of the monthly variance swaps every third Friday. The strategy assumes a constant 1% vega exposure and investor uses an estimate of the future realized variance risk premium by assuming that future unobservable one month realized variance would be equal to the recent observable one month realized variance. The portfolio is equally weighted and rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is shorting volatility, and as such, it can’t be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.