In the past, many anomalies have been documented, such as the size, value, quality or momentum effects. From the practical point of view there is one problem, the ‘publish or perish’ culture in academy world may give a bias towards many false-positive results and therefore, some academics suggest that thresholds for statistical significance should be raised. Moreover, the significance of many factors turns out to be critically dependent on methodological assumptions of the academic research such as frictionless rebalancing, no leverage costs and unlimited short-selling of micro caps. However, the practitioners or the investors would like to utilize the research to make a profit, but the aforementioned makes it a bit harder. The number of factors included to make an investing strategy needs to be narrowed down to a subset that is persistent and robust; the second complication is that translating multiple factors into one easily implementable investment strategy is not straightforward and simple. Additionally, a lot of investors face constraints on leverage and short selling. Therefore, one liquid and easy to implement a long-only portfolio, which gives access to multiple factors simultaneously seem to be the best option.
This can be achieved by a concept of low-risk investing by a new investment “conservative” formula which selects 100 conservative stocks from the universe of the 1000 largest U.S. stocks, based on volatility, net payout yield and momentum (combined into a conservative formula). The strategy combines reasonable factors, is easily implementable, robust and profitable even with transaction costs. Moreover, the quarterly rebalancing period reduces the net profit only by 10%. Last but not least, the strategy also works for European, Japanese and emerging markets.

Fundamental reason
If a simple investment strategy is profitable but can be explained by exposures to a wide range of theoretical long-short factors, then from an academic point of view, there is no relevant contribution to the existing literature. Even if the control factors require the use of accounting data, rely on micro caps, require high-frequency trading and assume full shorting opportunities. On the other hand, for investors, efficient exposure to multiple established factor premiums simultaneously is something desirable. The Conservative Formula, which combines the momentum, volatility and net payout yield, gives investors full and efficient exposure to the strongest academic factor premiums, what is the reason why the strategy works. Yet, the formula relies on simple price data and dividend data only. This has enabled the research to backtest its persistency and robustness back to 1929. Authors state that the limited number of simple factors also reduces the risk of ‘p-hacking’ or ‘factor fishing’. Moreover, the formula is applied to the largest 1,000 US stocks to ensure that the results are economically meaningful and the turnover is limited by rebalancing quarterly to reduce the trading costs.
Although the formula is based on just three simple investment factors, it was evaluated considering the most advanced asset pricing models that have been proposed in the recent literature. The result being the formula can match or even outperform the most advanced asset pricing factors with much lighter data input requirements. Lastly, the returns are consistent overtime of the whole backtesting period and consistent across various international stock markets.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of the 1,000 largest US stocks. Firstly, at the end of each quarter, the 1,000 largest stocks are then sorted into two groups, each consisting of 500 stocks, based on their historical 36-month stock return volatility. Considering only the 500 stocks with the lowest volatility, each stock is further ranked on its 12-1 month price momentum and total net payout yield (NPY) to shareholders (the ranks are from 1 to 500 where the 1 denotes the best stock). This shareholder yield consists of dividend yield and the net change in shares outstanding (calculated as the latest level divided by the 24-month average). Lastly, the momentum and NPY ranks (1-500) are simply averaged, and the investor longs the top 100 stocks. The strategy is rebalanced quarterly and is equally-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The selected strategy is designed as a long-only. Therefore, it can’t be used as a hedge against market drops as a lot of strategy’s performance comes from equity market premium (as the investor holds equities, therefore, his correlation to the broad equity market is very very high).