The growing importance of environmental, social and governance (ESG) has been one of the most significant phenomena to be seen over the last decade. For instance, the business roundtable, representing CEOs of US biggest companies, called for a redefinition of companies role to prioritise the sustainability over shareholder primacy. Supporting the importance of ESG, it was also the BlackRock CEO Larry Fink, who informed investors about plans to implement ESG as a new standard for investing. However, it is not only firms and investors who pay intention, but also academics.
In recent years, many studies have examined the reasons why firms employ ESG and whether such investments will enhance or destroy firm value. One of the literature streams argues, that sustainability investments disproportionately raise a firm’s costs, leading to a disadvantage in a competitive market. On the other hand, others argue, that ESG may enhance firm value by reducing tail risks, protecting reputation or attracting higher quality employees. Therefore, the question of whether and when ESG leads to enhanced shareholder value has been relatively unanswered, while much of ESG related information is hard to quantify.
However, the recent study from Kyle Welch and Aaron Yoon (2020) brings a unique idea, of how the ESG data can be used to earn abnormal returns. Being consistent with the previous literature, the authors find out that building a long/short portfolio based only on ESG data doesn’t bring a significant alpha return. Therefore, the second variable in the form of employee satisfaction has been implemented. Using the double sort approach, the shareholders’ value implications of sustainability investments and employee satisfaction have been tested. The researchers came with a finding that a value-weighted long/short portfolio created according to the double sort, that identifies firms with high (low) sustainability performance and employee satisfaction ratings, would bring an annual Fama and French five-factor alpha return of 5,83% from 2011 to 2019.

Fundamental reason
As earlier mentioned, the more detailed findings of this study show, that with using ESG as the only signal, the researchers did not find a meaningful alpha in the long/short portfolio. On the other hand, when using the employee satisfaction data as the only signal, the long/short portfolio generated an annual value-weighted alpha of 2.44%. Therefore we can suggest that it is the employee satisfaction data sort, that mainly drives the positive results of the presented strategy, while the ESG only enhance these results. It is the human capital, that has become much more important in modern-day business and many previous studies documented, that employee satisfaction predicts stock returns and therefore is an important determinant of firm value.
Important to notice is that although there is a suggestion that firm social investments drive the results, the authors do not claim that ESG causes employee satisfaction and that this leads to firm value. What they document is that firms that score high on ESG and employee satisfaction significantly outperform those firms with high employee satisfaction alone, indicating that employee satisfaction is an important condition for ESG to enhance shareholder value.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of US companies, that have available both MSCI ESG Ratings and Glassdoor employee satisfaction data. Two separate sorts are made in quartiles according to these data. If a company appears in the top quartile in both sorts, its stock is picked for the long portfolio. When a company appears in the bottom quartile in both sorts, its stock is picked for the short portfolio. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Quantpedia Edit: Our Quantconnect implementation uses a long-only approach as we do not have enough Glassdoor data for the short leg of this strategy.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not provide any information about the usage of the strategy as a hedge.