Momentum refers to a market anomaly in which assets with good past performance tend to rise further in the future and vice versa. Academic Papailias, Liu and Thomakos define a new type of momentum – Returns Signal Momentum (RSM). Thirty years of past data show that RSM is superior to cross-sectional momentum and time-series momentum (TSM). Returns signal momentum is a financial market momentum based on the probability of asset return signs. RSM generates position signals utilizing the signs of past returns of an individual asset, based on the estimation of the probability with reference to a probability threshold value. Comparing TSM and RSM, RSM takes into account each of the returns during the look-back period and does not calculate the total period return as in TSM. Another major difference is that RSM focuses purely on the signs of past returns. Those differences allow RSM to capture the trend more efficiently while avoiding temporary price reversals. Return signal momentum portfolio provides larger cumulative net profits, larger Sharpe ratio and lower maximum drawdown.

Fundamental reason
The rationality of RSM is attributed to short-term under-reaction and delayed over-reaction. The motivation for returns sign predictability stems from the theoretically shown fact that return sign dependence exists if the conditional mean of the returns is not equal to zero. The returns of most financial assets are positive in the long run; therefore, it is expected that sign dependence is possible to be detected.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 55 of the world’s most liquid exchange-traded futures instruments. Monthly returns are calculated for each financial instrument. The look-back period is set to 12 months. Using the monthly return signs in the look-back period, the probability of positive sign is calculated. For set threshold value equal to 0,4 a “buy” signal is generated indicating to enter a long position if the probability is bigger or equal to the threshold value. If this condition is not satisfied, enter a short position. Investor employs annualised ex-ante volatility method to scale the returns of each asset while using 40% critical value for the annual volatility. The portfolio is rebalanced every month.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Futures trend-following/momentum strategies are a cornerstone of trend-following CTA funds and as such is an excellent candidate for an uncorrelated strategy and very often a hedge to equity market factor. The source research paper doesn’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; however, we can expect that strategy will probably retain a negative correlation to equities. Backtest would be helpful to determine correlation and hedging characteristics.