Factor investing in equities is a well-researched topic and widely used in practice. However, fixed income and factor investing is complicated and underdeveloped compared to equities. Fortunately, this subject is gaining popularity in recent research, and this paper summarizes some recent results with new insights. While carry and momentum are more straightforward, literature also recognizes the value and defensive investing in ﬁxed income, where the definition of such factors is not straightforward. The paper includes analysis of various styles such as Carry, Curve, Momentum, Reversal, Value, Fundamentals and Defensive.
Moreover, the paper also includes a variety of different approaches on how to construct factors corresponding to the styles. Still, we would centre our attention around one style at the time (other styles, as well as different factor construction methods, can be found in the paper). No doubt, fundamentals are deeply connected with probably every asset class, and bonds are not any exception. According to the study, a factor that considers economic growth (GDP growth) could be utilized in portfolio construction. Moreover, the paper adds that these fundamental indicators are sometimes compared to reference levels and that changes in fundamentals could be measured either directly or as a gap from a moving average. Considering fundamentals connected with growth, the paper suggests the usage of the growth gap as a factor that could be utilized in portfolio construction. Lastly, there are more possibilities how to construct such factor; the paper recognizes 3y gap, 1y gap and 1y change. However, there is no consent which construction method is the best since the paper allocates the portfolio into all factors with different weights and provides median and some other summary statistics.

Fundamental reason
Intuition suggests that economic growth and bonds have to be related. For example, one study states that equating consumption to output and neglecting uncertainty, real rates would ﬂuctuate around economic growth. There is also weak evidence for the link between growth and real short-term rates because short rates are used by central banks to steer output growth. Moving into long term rates, another research states that debt/GDP is one of the key drivers of long-term rates, but growth does not play a consistent role. Although, there is not any clear fundamental reason why exactly the growth gap predicts bond futures, given the statistical and machine learning methods, such usage of the growing gap in the portfolio construction is a result of analysis which factor would be the best, and the result should be reliable.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 10-year government bond futures for five countries – Australia, Canada, Germany, the UK and the US. Firstly, construct the growth (GDP growth) gap factor: 3y gap, 1y gap or 1y change (paper understands the gap as the change measured as a gap from a moving average) – the paper offers bottom, median and top strategies based on allocation across all the diﬀerent versions of a strategy. Therefore, in practice, the same approach of allocation across different versions should be executed, or there should be chosen one factor. The factor portfolios are constructed by buying and selling bond futures in proportion to a given indicator, where the weight is a result from the cross-sectional score, that is a result of a comparison (difference) of a given indicator with the cross-sectional average adjusted by the cross-sectional dispersion across indicators. The directional bias is removed by buying or selling the right amount of the market factor, that is defined by allocation across all countries with equal weight, adjusted daily. The strategy is rebalanced quarterly (because of the availability of the data).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.