The U.S. ETF market had experienced large growth over the last decade when total ETF assets went to over $2 trillion in 2014. ETFs are easily accessible to both novice and professional investors; therefore analysis of arbitrage activity in ETFs and their underlying assets touches nearly every corner of the global asset market. ETFs are similar to closed-end mutual funds. Any trader can buy a share of an ETF which is a claim to the ETF’s underlying assets. However, the difference lies in the primary market mechanism in which pre-qualified parties (authorized participants) create or remove shares in the ETF and trade them for the underlying assets to ensure the law of one price holds. A strategy which short sells ETFs that have experienced the most share creations (the most inflows) and buys ETFs with the most share redemptions (the most outflows), generates abnormal annual returns. Looking at the time-series, ETFs experience more negative returns following inflows and more positive returns following outflows. Past data proved that share creations and redemptions covary with the fund’s future performance, which can be exploited to enhance future returns. Results show that noise traders do not cancel each other out and they matter for prices even in the presence of arbitrageurs.

Fundamental reason
Prices rise as investors flow into ETFs, but the price increase will predictably reverse over the next six months. ETF investors are pushing prices above fundamental value, which causes them to underperform the very index they are trying to buy. Research suggests that ETF investors are poorly timing the market; investors buy when ETF prices are too high (relative to the value of the underlying assets). On the other hand, they systematically sell when ETF prices are too low. Return predictability analysis shows that when ETF fund size increases, the subsequent performance is poor and vice versa.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of more than 1,200 U.S. ETFs. From the ETFs pool, pick ETFs that have at least $50 million in assets and at the same time experienced a month in which one-half of the trading days had some share creation or redemption activity. The investor builds dual sort portfolios using the sorting variables ShareChange and BidAskSpread. BidAskSpread is calculated as an EFT’s average Ask minus Bid price divided by the midpoint. ETFs are firstly sorted (one month period) into five portfolios based on the prior period’s bid-ask spread. ETFs are then sorted into quintiles, within each bid-ask-spread portfolio, based on the prior period’s aggregate creation/redemption activity, resulting in twenty-five total portfolios. Investor goes long portfolio with the lowest ShareChange (quintile with the highest redemption activity) and simultaneously with the lowest bid-ask spread. Investor goes short portfolio with the highest ShareChange (quintile with the highest creation activity) and simultaneously with the lowest bid-ask spread. The portfolio is equal-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.