The academic literature on factor investing has grown considerably since the work of Fama (1972). While the empirical evidence on various factor premia in developed equity markets is abundant, the literature on factor investing in emerging markets is relatively sparse. Motivated by the increasing interest in factor investing in India, Raju and Teli (2022) analyze the performance of the long-only single-factor portfolios built from the most liquid universe of stocks in the Indian stock market. To this end, the authors split the investment universe on a monthly basis into deciles to form equally-weighted portfolios of size, value, momentum, low-risk, quality, growth, and beta. Their main objective is to examine whether the long-only factor strategies outperform the broader S&P BSE 200 index. Among the factors analyzed, the top deciles of size, value, and more marginally growth underperformed the index in terms of the raw Sharpe ratios. Upon a closer look at the value factor, its Sharpe ratios show a slight monotonic downward trend across deciles with rising book-to-market ratios. For instance, the bottom decile (growth stocks) exhibits more than double the Sharpe ratio compared to the top decile (value stocks). Indeed, such a pattern indicates a strong outperformance of growth stocks in India, underlining the weak period for a value factor globally over the past decade. Naturally, a systematic buying of the growth stocks in India leads to a profitable trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
The book-to-market (BM) ratio compares a company’s book value relative to its market cap. The higher the BM ratio, the more fundamentally cheap is the analyzed company. Companies with high BM ratios, i.e. value stocks, should outperform during bear markets as investors seek safety in times of uncertainty. Conversely, in a bull market fuelled by low-interest rates, as was the case in the past decade, value stocks are poised to underperform, and growth stocks shine.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of S&P BSE 200 index constituents. First, at the end of each month, compute for each constituent stock the ratio of its book value in the month t-3 to its market price in month t-1. Second, normalize the calculated book-to-market ratios using the z-scores. To deal with negative values, transform further the z-scores following Eq. 2 (if the z-score is larger or equal to 0, take one plus z-score; if the z-score is negative, take the value of 1 divided by the one minus z). Third, sort all stocks in the universe into the equally weighed deciles based on their z-scores, where the top (bottom) decile consists of the highest (lowest) z-score stocks. Buy the bottom decile (stocks with the lowest book-to-market ratios) and rebalance monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - on average, shorting a naive loser portfolio is a losing proposition; in other words, going short loser portfolios is not statistically likely to generate positive expected returns.