Its widely believed that short selling plays an essential role in public markets. In more detail, short selling improves price discovery and rational capital allocations, preventing massive financial bubbles and, most importantly, helping to uncover fraud. This statement is supported by numerous publications as well as many respected investors. Further, the publications uncovered a substantial negative relationship between short-selling activity and stock returns. However, most studies have focused almost completely on the U.S. market.
The novel research is the first one to examine this statement outside the U.S. market. More specifically, they examined if short interest can predict market returns in 32 countries – 23 developed and 9 emerging markets (Russia, Greece, Ireland, Belgium, Portugal, Canada, United States, Japan, Hong Kong, Austria, Singapore, Germany, Spain, New Zealand, Denmark, South Korea, Italy, Norway, Australia, Switzerland, Mexico, South Africa, Taiwan, United Kingdom, Israel, Netherlands, Sweden, France, Turkey, Brazil, Finland, Poland). The author suggests that short interest can predict the aggregate stock returns, which seems to be the best, globally available market return predictor. The research found that short interest significantly and negatively affects markets in 24 out of the 32 analyzed countries. Further, the short-interest index (SII) is more powerful than any other current return predictors. As a result, the return predictability pattern revealed in this study might be applied to develop a profitable index futures trading strategy. Although the author writes primarily about the SII (residuals is a detrended version of equal-weighted short interest index), he shows that the simple equal-weighted index has comparable predicting power. Furthermore, the trading strategy presented in the paper is based on the simple equal-weighted index.

 

Fundamental reason
The stock market risk premium has numerous market returns predictors. Some of the predictors are used for decades, while some are new and more speculative. However, only a few of them have been proved to outperform the short interest index. Furthermore, the short-interest index is profoundly the indicator that is available worldwide. Based on the author’s research, the short-interest index outperforms all known indicators and variables based on the forecasting models for future market returns.
Even though the short-interest index has many benefits, its predictive ability differs significantly by country. More specifically, short sale restrictions which increase short-selling expenses boost the short-interest index predictive power. On the other hand, regulations that can make short-selling easier reduce short-interest index predictive power. Additionally, SII predicts higher returns in countries with a limited supply of shares available for lending and a significant concentration of this supply in the hands of only a few people. The modified version denoted as EWSI is used in a trading strategy. The reason for it is that it is easier to compute with comparable predicting power, and the logic behind EWSI and SII is the same. Even in table 3, we can observe that both indicators are statistically and economically significant. Therefore, the choice is up to the investor.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of futures contracts in each country (Russia, Greece, Ireland, Belgium, Portugal, Canada, United States, Japan, Hong Kong, Austria, Singapore, Germany, Spain, New Zealand, Denmark, South Korea, Italy, Norway, Australia, Switzerland, Mexico, South Africa, Taiwan, United Kingdom, Israel, Netherlands, Sweden, France, Turkey, Brazil, Finland, Poland). The data for short interest in each country consists of all stocks traded on the country’s major exchange (exchange with the highest number of traded stocks) except for Japan (Tokyo and Osaka), Singapore (Mainboard and Catalyst), South Korea (KSE and KOSDAQ), Spain (Madrid and Mercado Continuo Español), Taiwan (TWSE and TWO), and the United States (NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq). Additionally, each country is required to have at least 5 consecutive years of data with at least ten stocks with non-zero short-selling activity. The daily data on short sales are from IHS Markit, and daily data on market index returns and their predictors are from Datastream.
Firstly, compute the previous-week equal-weighted short interest (EWSI) in each country. EWSI is calculated as the average short interest of the available stocks in the country. EWSI can be described as a market pessimism coming from short sellers’ beliefs that vary over time. Sell the most liquid near-month market index futures contract for each country if the corresponding EWSI is one standard deviation higher than its past historical average. Hold the short position for 12 weeks. Strategy is equally-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not provide any information regarding this topic. In theory, the strategy enters only into short positions so that it could be a hedge. However, there might be a similar risk as in momentum crashes. After the crises, the losers tend to bounce back strongly, causing momentum to crash. A similar risk could also be expected in this strategy – indexes heavily shorted bouncing back strongly.