Short selling is a rather complex strategy posing many risks to the trader. The short seller has to find and borrow an overpriced stock, sell it, and after the price reverts to the real value, he buys it back and returns it. Obviously, this is no simple matter and such trader has to be very well informed. This is what the paper’s strategy means to use. To put it simply, the authors examine the possibility of following sophisticated investors.
The authors argue, that the short interest (the number of shares shorted divided by the number of shares outstanding) indicates overpricing, and thus lower future returns. A novel dataset from S3 Partners is used, providing a better way to observe the amount of shorted shares – in contrast to other researches which had to use estimates. Additionally, the research shows that the short interest works even better when it is combined with momentum. Authors show that a hedged portfolio short in the top short-interest decile among the top momentum decile generates a highly significant alpha, which is even higher than the unconditional short-interest strategy. That leads to the idea that following trends in short-selling might be a good way to tell which stocks to short, especially combined with the momentum anomaly.

Fundamental reason
Following from the fact that short selling isn’t a simple matter and there are many risks, which the short sellers have to take, they are usually experienced and sophisticated traders. This means they are able to quite effectively recognize overpricing in a stock, which would lead to lower future returns in the portfolio. This straightforward intuition is proven in the paper and it is shown that there indeed exists a link between high short-selling activity and future lower returns, and that is the reason why this strategy relies on shorting high short-interest stocks. Additionally, the momentum addition is perfectly reasonable – stocks with high past momentum could be easily overpriced and this mispricing should be recognized by short sellers.
To sum it up, the strategy primarily functions because it consists of following the “smart money” that is proven over time, and the principle itself is nothing new in the financial markets.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of CRSP stocks, ADRs and ETFs are excluded. Firstly, sort the stocks into deciles according to their six month’s momentum. Secondly, among the deciles, sort the stocks into deciles based on their level of short interest. In the top momentum decile, short the highest short interest decile and long the decile with the lowest short interest. The strategy is rebalanced monthly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - The paper does not include any information on this topic.