Factor investing in equities is a well-researched topic and widely used in practice. However, fixed income and factor investing is complicated and underdeveloped compared to equities. Fortunately, this subject is gaining popularity in recent research, and this paper summarizes some recent results with new insights. While carry and momentum are more straightforward, literature also recognizes the value and defensive investing in ﬁxed income, where the definition of such factors is not straightforward. The paper includes analysis of various styles such as Carry, Curve, Momentum, Reversal, Value, Fundamentals and Defensive. Moreover, the paper also includes a variety of different approaches on how to construct factors corresponding to the styles. Still, we would centre our attention around one style at the time (other styles, as well as different factor construction methods, can be found in the paper). Some authors deﬁne value as the change in yields over the last five years, which this paper considers as a classic reversal signal. Therefore, the change in yields is considered as a reversal factor, but the paper does not suggest to use such a long period. There are more possibilities for how to construct such factor, and paper recognizes three months, six months and three years change. However, there is no consent which construction method is the best since the paper allocates the portfolio into all factors with different weights and provides median and some other summary statistics.

Fundamental reason
Various past research understands the value in fixed income as the change in yields; on the other hand, this paper considers the change in yields to be a reversal factor. Although the factor is obviously working and could be utilized in practice, there is not any clear fundamental reason why exactly the reversal, constructed as the change in yields should predict bond futures. But given the statistical and machine learning methods employed in the study, such usage of reversal in the portfolio construction is a result of analysis which factor would be the best, and the result should be reliable. Although the theoretical background is not provided, authors have found out that the reversal is the only factor that is not positively linked with carrying that is considered as the traditional and often the main driver of bond returns.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 10-year government bond futures for five countries – Australia, Canada, Germany, the UK and the US. Firstly, construct the reversal factor (the change in yields) as three months, six months and six years change – the paper offers bottom, median and top strategies based on allocation across all the diﬀerent versions of a strategy. Therefore, in practice, the same approach of allocation across different versions should be executed, or there should be chosen one factor. The factor portfolios are constructed by buying and selling bond futures in proportion to a given indicator, where the weight is a result from the cross-sectional score, that is a result of a comparison (difference) of a given indicator with the cross-sectional average adjusted by the cross-sectional dispersion across indicators. The directional bias is removed by buying or selling the right amount of the market factor, that is defined by allocation across all countries with equal weight, adjusted daily. The strategy is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.