Although ESG investing has become one of the most frequently discussed topics, the concept is not that new. The impact investing and aim to have more responsible portfolios are much older than all the latest research that utilizes the ESG criteria to find an abnormal return. Moreover, the increasing number of academic research is becoming tangled and conflicting, especially in carbon-related investing. Some authors have identified that green stocks perform better, while others argue that brown stocks perform better since these stocks have become undervalued or have to compensate for the carbon risks. The novel research of Jondeau et al. (2021) has a vastly different aim than the research trying to find a carbon factor or time it. On the contrary to the active investing with frequent rebalancing, the authors aim to make portfolios more environmentally friendly (with lower carbon impact) while maintaining a similar performance or even geographical/sector composition as the benchmark.
The paper shows that by excluding a few most significant polluters, the portfolio can become significantly more environmentally friendly with a much lower carbon footprint, with practically no significant performance difference compared to the benchmark. As a result, the strategy can be used to construct passive portfolios (with relatively infrequent yearly rebalancing) that are more “Paris-aligned.” As a substitution for the omitted stocks with the larger carbon intensity, the authors propose three variants: distribution of the weight equally to the remaining stocks (proportionally), investing symmetrically to the stocks with the lowest carbon footprint, or by investing into stocks in the same country and sector, but with fewer emissions. For simplicity, we present the proportional variant since the exact choice should probably be made by the investor such that it is tailored to individual needs. There are some differences in overall footprint or tracking error, but it is similar across all variants in terms of performance.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the possibility of swapping several major pollutants for “cleaner” stocks without affecting the benchmark’s performance is that the distribution of the carbon intensity is highly skewed to the right. It means that a small number of companies have extremely high emission intensities. Since these companies are “extremes,” their omitting can significantly improve the carbon profile of the overall portfolio, with only a minor effect on the performance, regardless of whether the divesting from these companies is improving the performance or not. As a result, only a tiny portion of 1% stocks (in regard to the overall market cap) can drastically reduce the overall carbon intensity of the portfolio.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of ACWI stocks with an available carbon intensity measure and market capitalization. Emission data are obtained from S&P Trucost. As the first step, calculate the emission intensity as the tonnes of CO2 equivalents per million dollars of revenue (total emissions divided by the revenue). The carbon intensity is calculated using Scope 1-3 emissions. Secondly, sort the stocks based on their increasing carbon intensity and use the value-weighted approach to find the stocks to omit:
Sum the market weights (market cap divided by the total market cap of all stocks) of the sorted stocks such that you obtain the 90% of the total market cap (or individually chosen number – the paper examines the 75%, 90%, and 99%).
Keep 90% of the stocks and drop the rest (the highest pollutants which did not pass the criteria).
Adjust the weights such that you are fully invested (proportionally, based on the market cap).
For example, imagine that we only have three stocks with a market cap of 5, 4, and 1 million and carbon intensity ranks of (2,1,3). We start by including the second stock since it has the lowest rank, representing 40% of the total market cap. The second-best stock is stock number 1, which has the rank 2. When we add the first stock, we have hit the threshold of 90% – we have represented 90% of the total market cap. We omit the third stock and proportionally adjust the weights of the first and second stock to have a value-weighted portfolio with a better carbon profile.
The strategy is rebalanced yearly and value-weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - The strategy is long-only and aims to replicate the benchmark with a smaller environmental impact/carbon intensity but similar performance.
