Firms usually try to capture investors’ attention as high company’s popularity often means high stock prices (an example could be Facebook IPO). The easy way to increase investor’s (and customer’s) awareness is advertising. Academic research confirms this idea and shows that a greater amount of advertising is associated with a larger stock return in the advertising year. However, a smaller stock return in the year after the advertising year follows. We can’t easily know which companies have high advertising expenses in the current year (as financial statements are reported with a substantial lag). Still, we can easily exploit the post-advertising year effect by shorting stocks with high advertising expenses in a prior year.

Fundamental reason
Academic research explains this anomaly by investors’ limited attention. It suggests that limited time and resources preclude individual investors from considering all possible investments and restrict the amount of information they can analyze. Research states that attention attracted via advertising could increase the contemporaneous stock price in the advertising year either because more attention increases the magnitude of buy orders relative to sell orders or because more attention increases the heterogeneity in investor beliefs. In both cases, it could be expected that attention-grabbing advertising increases stock price in the contemporary advertising year. As the invited attention wears off over time, stock price decreases in the future, resulting in a negative future stock return.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of firms from NYSE, Amex and Nasdaq with a market capitalization greater than $20 million in the prior year. Investor defines year t as the advertising year, year t − 1 as the year prior to the advertising year, and year t + 1 as the year subsequent to the advertising year. Change in advertising in year t (∆Advt) is measured as the change in the log values of advertising expenditures from year t − 1 to year t.

Investor ranks stocks into ten deciles every year based on ∆Advt. He then forms a zero-investment portfolio that shorts the stocks in decile 10 (high advertising stocks) and longs the stocks in decile 1 (low advertising stocks). Stocks are bought in the 7th month of the year subsequent to the advertising year (to ensure that investor has all financial data from the previous year) and are held for the following six months. Stocks in the portfolio are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is; however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.