The relationship between stock market returns and change in the future economic activity has been regularly revised in many studies over the past years. It is often believed, that the market trend represents the “flagship“ indicator of real future performance of the economy, while the future economic prospects or sudden shocks get included in the stock prices at fastest.

Examining the explanatory power of anticipated economic growth on individual stock returns, the research from Sheng Zu et al. (2020) comes with a unique idea of how this effect could be turned into abnormal profits, by designing a trading strategy based on rational forecasts of future economic activity. The forecast of the future economic activity is represented by the growth rates of the CPI deflated industrial production index. In the times, when the investor expects future economic conditions to be above the long-term trend, the abnormal returns could be gained by buying stocks, that are positively correlated with the business cycle. This technique could also be applied in times when the investor expects future economic conditions to be under the long-term trend. In this occasion, the investor could either enter a short position on stocks, that are positively correlated with the business cycle or go long on stocks that are negatively correlated with the business cycle.

The deeper investigation of this study runs a linear regression for each stock, explaining its return with growth rates of industrial production, as well as with other benchmark factors for market, size, value, momentum and illiquidity risks. The purpose of running this linear regression is to define, which stocks can be considered as pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical. In case, when the beta coefficient obtained from regression is positive and statistically significant, the particular stock can be assigned as pro-cyclical. If the expected future economic conditions are above(below) the long-run trend, the investor goes long(short) on pro-cyclical stocks. On the other hand, with significant negative beta coefficient, the stock can be assigned as counter-cyclical. However, the researches were not able to find a significant relationship between returns from counter-cyclical stocks and the business cycle. Therefore, the presented strategy suggest only to go long(short) on pro-cyclical stocks, if the expected future economic conditions are above(below) the long-run trend. Rebalancing monthly, the long portfolio of such stocks would bring an alpha annual return of 24,32% from 1997 to 2013.

Fundamental reason
Real GDP and industrial production growth rates are considered as important determinants of future firms cash flows and expected returns. These factors could vary over time and thus influence the future expected cash flows, which in turn affects stock prices and investment decisions. The combination of correct identification of these future economic conditions and stocks sensitiveness to business cycle brings the investor an interesting opportunity to earn a profit. The stocks sensitiveness to a business cycle can be easily identified by running a linear regression, which explains its return by future economic conditions. This study finds strong evidence that there is persistence in the relationship between returns on pro-cyclical stocks and the business cycle. However, such evidence does not exhibit when moving to counter-cyclical stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of stocks listed in the US CRSP database. If the expected future economic conditions are above(below) the long-run trend, the investor goes long(short) on pro-cyclical stocks. The pro-cyclical stocks are identified by running a linear regression, which explains the stock returns with the growth of industrial production in 36 months lookback period and risk factors such as market, size, value, momentum and illiquidity risks. If the beta coefficient obtained from linear regression is positive and significant, the stock can be classified as pro-cyclical and added to our portfolio. The portfolio is equally-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy tries to go long cyclical stocks during the positive phase of the business cycle and go short during the negative phase of the business cycle. The research paper doesn’t state the performance of this strategy during the negative phase of the business cycle (recession/bear market), but we can assume that it’s positive. In any case, independent backtest is necessary to assess better if this strategy can be used as a hedge against bear markets.