Novel research aims to investigate the out-of-sample predictability of returns using the basis between spot and futures contracts (basis), for the four major asset classes: commodities, equities, ﬁxed income and foreign exchange (FX). Basis contains information about the future expected returns for each asset class examined. Moreover, it is a unifying predictor that is related to the previously documented asset-speciﬁc predictors such as dividend yields in equities, yield curve slope in bonds, interest rate diﬀerential in FX and basis in commodities. Paper empirically demonstrates that this basis predicts future returns for examined asset classes using standard in-sample techniques and later on, introduces a new adaptive predictor related to the basis which out of sample consistently beats the historical average with economically meaningful implications. Firstly, three naive predictors are considered that are calculated for each security as the weighted averages of three basic predictors (the historical average return of a security, its basis – the logarithmic diﬀerence between the spot and futures contracts, and the historical average of the basis), with finding that, on average, the naive predictors produce positive out-of-sample R-squared values. However, the strategy considered is constructed with a restricted predictor that requires all weights to be non-negative with an intercept equal to zero and the sum of the slope coeﬃcients equal to one, as recommended in Campbell and Thompson. The long-short strategy goes long securities with the expected return in excess of the cross-sectional mean and shorts securities with the expected return below the cross-sectional mean. Performance of a simple long-short strategy based on this predictor is robust across sub-periods, market environments, portfolio construction approaches, while still being profitable even if the transaction cost is included.

Fundamental reason
Firstly, the current basis contains information about future cash yield growth and future spot premia (excess returns of active futures contracts). Looking on the three naive predictors, naive predictors make forecasts about security i return using information from security i alone, however, the paper states that it is likely that pooling information across securities can improve the quality of forecasts. Naive predictors deliver positive out-of-sample R-squared for 66% to 77% of securities (depending on the exact predictor speciﬁcation). Results prove that basis contains information about future returns that can be captured in out-of-sample, however paper turns into the restricted predictor with similar performance (to naive predictors) that include cross-sectional information in predictive future returns. In our opinion, the restricted regression could be too complicated, and one should consider a naive predictor III (the average of the security i own historical average return, historical average basis and its most recent basis) or a simple regression instead. According to the paper, the performance of the restricted predictor is similar to that of the naive predictors, but the weights are calibrated rather than imposed.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 65 futures. Commodities (28 securities), Equity Indices (12 securities), Fixed Income (18 securities) and Foreign Exchange (7 securities), the full list can be found on page 9.

The basis of market i at time tau is deﬁned as the logarithmic diﬀerence between the spot price and the futures contract, annualized by multiplying by 365 and divided by the number of calendar days between the expirations of the two futures contracts (equation 1, page 9).

Firstly, calculate the historical average return µ(t), historical average basis yµ(t) and the most recent basis y(t). Secondly, use a restricted regression where the weights to each predictor variables are non-negative (equations 12 and 13 at page 17, more information about this regression can be found Campbell and Thompson (2008)). Once the slope coeﬃcients are estimated, the restrictive predictor is deﬁned as a linear combination of its slope coefficients and predictor variables (the last equation on page 17). As we have written in “Fundamental reasons” part, in our opinion, the restricted regression could be too complicated, and one should consider a naive predictor III (the average of the security i own historical average return, historical average basis and its most recent basis) or a simple regression instead.

The long-short strategy goes long securities with the expected return in excess of the cross-sectional mean and shorts securities with the expected return below the cross-sectional mean, is equally weighted and is rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis.