In the past, many researchers studied the relationship between stocks which could be categorized into the same group such as stocks belonging to the same industry, stocks of companies that share the same geographic location or stocks of companies linked along the supply chain. However, a new approach studied whether shared analyst coverage can offer a unified explanation for seemingly distinct cross-asset momentum effects. Analysts tend to cover economically linked stocks not necessarily belonging to the same industry or geographic location or linked along the supply chain. This creates unique groups of stocks, which could be used to enhance returns. Moreover, six cross-asset momentum anomalies were studied as a comparison to the connected-stock momentum: industry momentum, geographic momentum, customer momentum, customer industry momentum, supplier industry momentum and single- to multi-segment firm momentum. Results suggest that the previously studied cross-asset momentum effects are inside the span of “Connected-Stocks Momentum” and standard factors. To sum it up, results show that past return on a portfolio of stocks connected through common analyst coverage positively forecasts future returns.

Fundamental reason
Relationship between connected stocks is being driven by investor’s limited ability to process information. Moreover, investors have greater difficulty extracting information from a large number of related firms. Recent research shows that analyst co-covered peers explain the cross-sectional variation in firm returns and fundamentals better than traditional industry peers. By using analyst peers to connect stocks, linkages that are unique to each firm can be studied what is opposite to most previous studies which aggregate stocks into buckets. While some studies do use firm-specific linkages, they have much smaller cross-sections and are limited to linkages along one particular dimension only. On the other hand, analyst coverage peers are available for the majority of publicly traded firms, and by using analyst peers, linkages along multiple dimensions can be examined simultaneously. Aforementioned implicates that the cross-asset return predictability will be stronger among analyst co-covered stocks.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks listed on NYSE, AMEX and NYSE MKT that are covered by analysts. Stocks with price below $5 at the end of the prior month are excluded. Firstly, at the end of each month, two stocks are defined as connected if at least one analyst covers both stocks (the IBES detail file is used to determine shared analyst coverage). Secondly, a stock is considered to be covered by an analyst if the analyst issued at least one FY1 or FY2 earnings forecast for the stock over the past 12 months. Each month, stocks are ranked into quintile portfolios based on the past return on a connected-stock portfolio (CS RET). CS RET is calculated at the end of each month and for each stock. CS portfolio return is equal to the weighted average return of all stocks linked to it during the month (CS portfolio is calculated as a sum of connected-stocks – those with shared analyst coverage and it’s exact formula can be found in the paper). Long the quintile portfolio with the highest return and short the quintile portfolio with the lowest return. The portfolio is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.