Closing auctions are the last and important events of the trading day across all major and minor exchanges in the world. Two types of orders that play roles in setting the closing price are accepted before the market officially closes: Market on Close (MOC) and Limit on Close (LOC). These closing auction prices are essential because they are used to price portfolios and derivative assets.
In this novel research paper, the closing auctions and the fact that trading volume in closing auctions has significantly increased in recent years are examined.
Firstly, the authors identify the important factors that underline the growth of closing auctions. The first important factor might be the growth of ETFs. The growth potentially contributes to the rapid growth of closing auction volume, since arbitrage investors use convergence arbitrage with ETFs to utilize differences between ETF prices and their net asset value (NAV). Secondly, they investigate the effect of closing auctions on stock prices. Significant order imbalances between buyer-initiated and seller-initiated typically precede closing auctions are documented. Potentially, order imbalances could impact prices through the information they carry and through potential price pressure.
The results show that stocks with the highest order imbalances largely and significantly outperform stocks with the lowest order imbalances during last 15 minutes of the trading day. However, it was observed that about 24% of the price impact is reversed by the open the next day. Furthermore, these reversals continue over the next three to five days, resulting in a cumulative reversal of about 83% of the initial price impact. Therefore, there are two possible strategies, the first consists of buying stocks with the largest imbalances and shorting stocks with the lowest imbalances, initiating the positions 15 minutes before the market close and liquidating the positions at market close. The second possibility is to flip the positions and enter them at the market close. Therefore, the strategy utilizes the reversal and consists of a long position in stocks with the lowest imbalances and short position in stocks with the highest imbalances. Positions are closed after five days. From now on, our attention is centred around the first strategy (the second strategy is also included in the Quantpedia´s screener).

Fundamental reason
Market-on-Close and Limit-on-Close orders are essential components of closing auctions, as mentioned before. Looking at the NYSE exchange, the market begins to receive information about MOC orders for NYSE-listed stocks at 3:45 pm. As MOC orders reveal buyer information- and seller-initiated trades align with order imbalances, the changes in stock prices between 3:45 pm and market close measure the price impact of closing auction trades. The authors concluded that stock returns from 3:45 pm to close are significantly related to order imbalances announced at 3:45 pm. Consequently, they consider a trading strategy that buys the decile of stocks with the largest buy imbalance and sells the decile with the largest sell imbalances at 3:45 pm. This strategy earns 32 basis points (bps) from 3:45 pm to close, which yields an annualized return of about 80%.
Further, they estimate the permanent and temporary components of the price changes and the price impact. They observed that about 24% of the price impact is reversed by the open the next day. These reversals continue over the next three to five days, resulting in a cumulative reversal of about 83% of the initial price impact. However, as this price impact is mostly temporary, the findings indicate that uninformed traders account for most of the closing auction volume. Yet only 17% of the price impact is permanent, which indicates that informed traders contribute a significant portion of the closing auction volume.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of U.S. stocks with common shares from the CRSP database (stocks traded on NYSE). The sample is comprised of NYSE-listed ordinary common shares (share codes 10 or 11 in CRSP). First, examine the trajectory of the market-on-close (MOC) order imbalance from 3:45 p.m. to market close. Compute the order imbalance (OI) as the difference of the number of buys and sell MOC orders, respectively, as of 3:45 p.m. divided by the total number of shares traded on day t. Sort stocks into deciles based on order imbalances as of 3:45 p.m. The trading strategy for 3:45 p.m. to close goes long for the highest decile and short for the lowest decile. Portfolios are equal-weighted and rebalanced intradaily.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Paper does not include information about the possibility of using this strategy as a hedge.
