Academic papers are usually testing anomalies/strategies with weekly or monthly frequencies, and it is very unusual to find a paper with a simple and interesting strategy on an intraday basis. Work by Gao, Han and Zhou about intraday momentum is such an exception. They describe a simple trading strategy which trades the last half-hour of equity market based on information from the first half-hour and the next to the last. Positive performance in these two half-hours predicts positive performance during the last trading half-hour, especially during days with important macroeconomic announcements (such as FOMC day and CPI and GDP announcements).

Fundamental reason
Academic research provides two explanations for this effect. The first explanation is based on the trading behaviour of daytraders. On a day when the first half-hour return is up substantially, which might be due to overnight or morning news, some traders may expect price reversion and go short. Since they will almost surely unwind to go at before market closes, and some of them may wait to unwind in the last half-hour. The second explanation is based on the strategic trading of informed traders. Admati and Peiderer (1988) show theoretically that informed traders will time their trades to high trading volume periods, and, with a different preference specification, Hora (2006) also shows that an optimal trading strategy is to trade rapidly at the beginning and the end of the trading horizon, and trade more slowly in the middle of the day.

Simple trading strategy
The investor uses the sign of first and twelfth half-hour returns as timing signals to time the market. He will take a long position in the market at the beginning of the last half hour if the timing signal is positive, and take a short position otherwise. He buys only if both signals are positive, and sells when both are negative; otherwise, he has a neutral position. The position is always liquidated at market close. Trading could be easily executed via ETFs or futures.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy is timing equity market, but traders can split this strategy into two halves and use the short-only part of this strategy. After a careful backtest, this short-only strategy might be used as a hedge/diversification during market/economic crises.