Trading strategies trying to capture volatility premium by trading VIX futures have become very popular during the last few years. Trading space has maybe become a little crowded, and therefore it may be a good idea to explore a possibility to trade VIX futures curve by using options instead of futures. The recent academic study examines VIX options and shows that VIX option buyers on average do not overpay at all or by much. Therefore it makes sense to take a look on VIX trading strategies using long positions in VIX options because of the limited risk associated with a VIX options holding (compared with a high risk associated with a holding of VIX futures). Research shows some profitable trading strategies based on the VIX futures roll that purchase VIX calls when the VIX futures curve is in backwardation and purchase VIX puts when the VIX futures curve is in contango.

Fundamental reason
The academic study states that the VIX does not tend to rise when VIX futures are above the VIX, VIX futures tend to roll down the VIX futures curve to a lower VIX at settlement and lose their value. It also shows the evidence that VIX options are not overpriced at all or by much over the sample period which suggests that outright purchases of VIX options to exploit the systematic tendencies of VIX futures could be attractive strategies that also enjoy limited risk.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of options on the VIX Index. The option trades are triggered when the daily roll–the spread between front VIX futures and the VIX, divided by the number of business days until the settlement of the VIX futures contract- is less than -0.10 VIX futures point in the case of backwardation and greater than +0.10 point in the case of contango. Trader purchases the closest to expiration at-the-money VIX calls when the VIX futures curve is in backwardation and purchases the closest to expiration at-the-money VIX puts when the VIX futures curve is in contango. Trades are entered and exited at the mid-point of closing bid-ask quotes, and new trades are entered as soon as they are triggered. The holding period for each trade is five business days. We estimate that 5% of the trading account is used for each trade, and backtested results from academic paper are scaled accordingly (5-day return from exhibit 6 is multiplicated by 1/20).

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of strategy (buying VIX puts options when VIX futures are in contango) is surely strongly correlated to the equity market. However, short-only leg (buying VIX call option when VIX futures are in backwardation) might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.