Media news is an important supply of public information, and the number of strategies uses news flow analysis for trading. However, an increase in the supply of information doesn’t have a strong influence on future returns. The news can have a limited impact on the stock return if investors have no interest. Therefore academic research shows that an increase in news coverage predicts positive stock returns only when it is accompanied by an increase in search volume – aka—investors’ demand for information. Then the resulting stock’s move is significant and proposed long-short strategy has attractive performance characteristics.

Fundamental reason
Research states “attention-grabbing” hypothesis – individual investors are net buyers of attention-grabbing stocks and thus increase positive price pressure. It shows that an increase in information demand per se cannot tell whether investors are responding to important corporate news or their emotions – these different forces may predict future returns in two entirely different directions. The stock market events which are driven by news exhibit price momentum, while those driven by pure sentiment exhibit price reversal. If the rise in Google search coincides with an important corporate news release, then the increase in attention may predict subsequent positive returns. Otherwise, a rise in attention may predict a subsequent price reversal as the sentiment fades. The paper shows that an increase in search volume predicts positive stock returns only when it is accompanied by an increase in news coverage.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all stocks from NYSE, Amex and Nasdaq with price higher than $5 (closed-end funds, REITs, unit trusts, ADRs and foreign stocks are excluded). The news articles are from Factiva, and the search volume data are from Google Trends. Investor tries to search news articles relevant to a given firm using tickers. The ticker is also used in the case of Google Trends application.

Investor divides the supply of information into three scenarios: no news coverage, an increase in news coverage and a decrease in news coverage. A firm-month is defined as no news coverage if there is no news coverage for the firm in the past 12 months. A firm-month is defined as an increase in news coverage if the number of the current news articles on the firm is above the 12-month moving average of the articles on the same firm. A firm-month is defined as a decrease in news coverage if the number of the current news articles on the firm is below its 12-month moving average.

Similarly, investor defines the demand for information into three scenarios: no search volume, increase in search volume, and a decrease in search volume. He defines a firm-month as no search volume if Google trends return no data due to low search volume or zero search volume for the last 12 months. He defines a firm-month as an increase in search volume and decreases in search volume if the search volume is above and below its 12-month moving average, respectively.

Each month, the investor creates a portfolio by going long the stocks with the increase in both information supply and demand and going short the DD stocks. Stocks are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is; however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.