Trend-following strategies are well documented and widely used in practice. Such approaches are based on a simple idea – examination of the past performance and going long assets that have performed the best while shorting assets that have performed the worst. The research examines the trend-following of equities, bonds, and FX that is already a part of our screener. The novel idea presented in this paper is a spillover effect. Spillover, or in other words, the lead-lag eﬀect is when one variable is cross-correlated with another variable at later times. The first variable is the leading variable, and the second is a lagging variable. Spillover effect in this context would mean that the past performance of one asset class would have an impact on the performance of different asset classes. The research examines spillover between bonds, currencies and equity indices for developed countries. Therefore, signals are obtained based on an asset in a given asset class to build a portfolio on related assets in other asset classes. Paper hypothesize that: Bonds have a negative eﬀect on FX and positive eﬀect on Equities; Equities have a negative eﬀect on Bonds and negative eﬀect on FX; FX has a positive eﬀect on Equities and positive eﬀect on Bonds. According to the paper, FX and equities seem to have no spillover to bond portfolios, but bonds are great to build equities portfolios. Figure 4 is helpful with the examination of spillovers, the highest Sharpe ratios for spillover portfolios are obtained for portfolios from bonds to equities and from equities to FX, and there is also Sharpe ratio of approximately 0.4 for portfolio from FX to equities. However, the paper presents results for the Multi-Asset approach, where the profitability is best for periods over 2.5 years, and the sweet spot is between 3 and 4 years. Lastly, on average, spillover strategies are not correlated with pure trend-following strategies and deliver strong risk-adjusted returns. Therefore, the strategy could be combined with traditional trend-following (results are in the paper).

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality should be the rationals behind the spillover effects. According to the paper, bonds have a negative effect on FX because a contractionary shock to US monetary policy leads to an appreciation of the USD and the author posits that this relationship holds even for 10-year yields. Additionally, also, the carry-trade should justify this relationship. Bonds should have a positive effect on equities because decreasing rates or in other words, performing bonds are one of the reasons for future equity performance. Low funding rates help companies with funding, recovery and improve their profitability.
Equities have a negative effect on bonds because a strong equity market and economy often imply a high inflation rate through a tighter labour market, which results in the increase of rates and subsequent fall of the bonds. Although in the short term, there is a positive correlation between equities and FX, different literature states that well-performing equities will cause currencies to depreciate. FX should have a positive eﬀect on bonds because, according to past research, currency depreciation reduces the pressure (for central banks) to cut rates. Moreover, if the depreciation is too fast, a foreign investor may consider his investment in such currency as a risky and naturally, demand a higher interest rate. Equities are positively affected by FX; the reason is simple, appreciating currency in the long term is a sign of a healthy economy where are equities performing well.
Despite the theory, not all relationships are observable from the data in the study (see figure 4). However, the idea for the working asset classes is profitable, and even the composite strategy is profitable, mainly because of the high performance of 3 spillover relationships: bonds to equities, equities to FX and FX to equities.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of currency forwards for nine exchange rates: AUD (Australia), CAD (Canada), EUR (Eurozone), JPY (Japan), NZD (New Zealand), NOK (Norway), SEK (Sweden), CHF (Switzerland) and GBP (UK) vs. the USD; nextly equity indices of 11 developed countries: ASX (Australia), TSX (Canada), CAC (France), DAX (Germany), FTSE/MIB (Italy), TOPIX (Japan), IBEX (Spain), OMX (Sweden), SMI (Switzerland), FTSE (United Kingdom), S&P500 (United States) and finally, from index futures: Australia 10-year Bond, Canada 10-year Bond, Euro Bund, Long Gilt, US 10-year Note, and 10-year swaps for: New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.

Firstly, consider following relationships: Bonds have a negative eﬀect on FX and positive eﬀect on Equities; Equities have a negative eﬀect on Bonds and negative eﬀect on FX; FX has a positive eﬀect on Equities and positive eﬀect on Bonds. Secondly, pick a lookback period from the sweet spot of 3 to 4 years (paper does not specify the exact lookback period, but provides cumulative returns for strategies based on lookback periods ranging from 6 to 60 months – figure 10). The signal is defined as the signum function of the cumulative returns for the asset that has a spillover on another from date t minus the lookback period to date t. For example, bonds had positive cumulative returns during the lookback period, and bonds have a positive effect on equities – therefore, the signal is positive. But bonds also have a negative impact on FX, so the signal for FX is negative. There is an equal risk contribution from asset classes. Allocate one-third of the overall risk budget to each asset class. There is also an equal risk contribution within asset classes. The weights are obtained from a maximization of the sum of natural logarithms of weights in the absolute values (equation 1, page 7). The paper examines all possibilities of spillovers and forms a summary strategy (formed from 6 strategies – spillover of bonds to FX and equities, a spillover of equities on FX and bonds and spillover of FX to bonds and equities). However, as we have previously mentioned, some spillovers could and maybe should be omitted. The strategy is rebalanced weekly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The source research paper doesn’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. However, momentum-based futures strategies usually perform well during market crises. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.