Everybody talks and knows about hot and popular IPOs like Amazon, Google or Facebook. They are mentioned in all the news and investors are always impatiently waiting to participate in the initial public offering. But there is one different category of IPOs – Cold IPOs – where issuers have to sell their stock at a major discount. Academic research has come up with a logical theory that only those issuers with high NPV prospects would be willing to fund their projects through a heavily discounted issue. Cold IPOs should, therefore, be a potentially very attractive investment. This hypothesis is confirmed by data which show that cold IPOs deliver outstanding returns localized mainly in the first few months after the initial offering.

Fundamental reason
Academic research explains abnormal returns by the bounded rationality of individual investors more likely to overlook IPOs that don’t attract their attention.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of IPOs from NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ. All “Penny Stocks”, Unit offerings, Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs), American Depository Receipts (ADRs), closed-end funds and IPOs with a price lower than $5 are removed from the sample. The investor then selects only those IPOs which had a final offer price below the initial filing range. The investor buys these “Cold IPOs” at the end of the first month after the offering and holds them for two months. Each IPO position in the portfolio is hedged by a short position in a related industry (via industry ETF or short position in a basket of stocks). IPOs in the portfolio are equally weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into the correlation structure of the proposed trading strategy to equity market risk. Therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to equity the market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.