In the past, single fundamental ratios were popular to identify undervalued stocks. As the next step, statistical models became more popular, relying primarily on linear regression and, hence, on linearity assumption. Although these models have become a standard quantitative tool (after all, the most recognized asset pricing models are qualitatively similar), novel machine learning methods are gaining popularity thanks to their ability to identify non-linear patterns or robustness. The novel research is a perfect example of this evolvement. The authors build on the fundamental model of Bartram and Grinblatt that uses 21 accounting variables to estimate the fair values of firms. The linear model can identify mispricing and undervalued stocks globally but does not seem to work that well in Europe.
The authors overcome this lack of performance by employing machine learning methods (gradient boosting and random forests) and show that the ML methods choose different variables compared to the linear model, but most importantly, the mispricing signals are more suitable in a trading strategy. As a result, the spread portfolio that buys the undervalued and shorts the overvalued stocks is more economically and statistically significant.

Fundamental reason
There are two major reasons for the functionality. Firstly, it is the idea of finding mispriced stocks. Based on the accounting (fundamental) variables, the model can find both undervalued and overvalued stocks and benefit from the mispricing by taking appropriate positions. Secondly, the functionality must also be attributed to the model. Although the linear model can deliver economically and statistically significant results, it lags behind both machine learning methods and their combined estimate. As a result, both idea and methodology are the key drivers of the strategy´s performance and should be equally taken as the reason for the functionality.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of EU 17 stocks (EU15 + Switzerland and Norway). Non-common equity stocks, foreign listings, secondary listings, financial firms, and firms with non-positive total assets or missing industry identifiers are excluded. Furthermore, the firms must have non-missing accounting variables (The list of variables is in Table A). Finally, exclude stocks with a market cap below ten million USD. Data are obtained from Refinitiv Datastream. The aim is to estimate the firm’s fair value by using the accounting variables from month t-1 to t-48 defined in Table A (fundamental variables such as Total Assets, Sales, Long Term Debt…). The variables are transformed (standardized) by cross-sectionally ranking in ascending order and mapping them into [-1,1] intervals. Additionally, the authors “deflate firms’ market capitalization by the total market value to alleviate the effect of changing market tastes and time-specific valuation norms.” Random forests and gradient boosting are trained to estimate the fair value based on this dataset. Combine these two estimates by averaging them to obtain the firm’s combined estimated fair value. Construct the mispricing signal as the estimated fair value minus the market cap divided by the market cap. Each month, sort stocks into quintiles based on their mispricing signal. Long the top quintile (undervalued stocks) and short the bottom quintile (overvalued stocks). The strategy is value-weighted and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - Table 2, Panel A, shows that ML investment strategies earn statistically and economically significant industry-adjusted returns spreads, profiting quite uniformly from the long and short positions. While LR and 𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑆𝑂 quintile spreads are significant, their economic relevance is substantially weaker, with a higher portion of alpha’s profitability coming from the short leg.