Same as the global economy, individual firms also go through cycles. Firms typically exhibit cyclical behaviours in fundamentals. Firm fundamentals may initially increase or decrease for a certain time period and then subsequently decrease or increase over another period of time, and this could be repeated. As novel research suggests, these fundamentals could be connected with the momentum and reversal – the two most profound and robust anomalies identiﬁed in the ﬁnancial markets. In this novel research, authors argue that the cyclical behaviour of ﬁrm’s fundamentals drives return momentum and subsequent reversal. Using a measure that summarizes a wide range of business activities of a ﬁrm, a potential investor can exploit this pattern to his benefit. However, from now on, we would focus our attention only on momentum.

Considering the individual firm’s fundamentals, authors consider four major areas: the proﬁtability, ﬁnancial leverage and balance sheet strength, eﬃciency of asset management, and quality of earnings and assets, on which there is available data on 13 diﬀerent seasonally adjusted fundamental ratios. To capture unanticipated changes, the changes in the ratios between two adjacent quarters for each stock are used. Nextly, an index of the changes based on the partial least squares (PLS) method, is constructed. As we have previously mentioned, these changes in fundamentals can be exploited in tradable strategies based on the previous quarter ﬁrm fundamental indexes (constructed by the PLS method). Although compared to simple momentum, the spread decile portfolios deliver slightly lower average returns, the portfolios based on fundamental indexes enjoy much smaller standard deviations, resulting in doubled SharpE Ratio. Additionally, the spread decile portfolios exhibit positive skewness, much lower maximum drawdown, and as a result, higher Calmar ratios. Moreover, these portfolios do not suﬀer from crashes like the traditional momentum portfolios.

Fundamental reason
There are at least three reasons why firms do experience cycles in their fundamentals. Firstly, uptrend fundamentals may be a result of technological breakthroughs with new or better products, however, as time flows this trend would slow down due to competitions from rivals that have their improved technologies or products. Secondly, a ﬁrm can have poor performance caused by mismanagement, where internal and external pressures can force the management team to turn the business around. Lastly, the cyclical nature of commodity prices, such as oil or iron ore, can drive not only mining businesses but also many other related businesses up and down, creating cyclical ﬁrm fundamentals. Explanation of the momentum, but also the subsequent reversal eﬀect is based on diﬀerent phases of the ﬁrm fundamental cycle, during which investors rationally respond to unanticipated positive/negative shocks. In essence, the fundamentals news are continuously updated. While investors are rationally updating their beliefs, there is unanticipated news each period. It is the rational response to this unanticipated news that creates initial momentum and also subsequent reversal, which suggests that it is important to choose a right rebalancing period. To sum it up, previous literature often attributes the source of the anomalies to investor behavioural bias such as underreaction or overconﬁdence.
On the other hand, this paper argues that momentum and reversal are generated by the cyclical nature of ﬁrm fundamentals and rational investor reaction to unanticipated changes of ﬁrm fundamentals. When the environment is good for the business, ﬁrm fundamentals are in an upward trajectory characterized by continued unanticipated positive changes and vice versa. When these unanticipated shocks are revealed, investors keep to raise or decrease the stock prices as they continue to update their beliefs given the new information, and thus creating winner or loser stocks and momentum in returns. However, after time this process is getting slower, and the trajectory gets a downward trend. Once the unanticipated shocks switch sign, winners become losers and losers become winners and return reversal occurs.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all domestic common stocks listed on the NYSE, AMEX and Nasdaq stock markets. Excluded are closed-end funds, real estate investment trusts (REITs), unit trusts, American depository receipts (ADRs) and foreign stocks (or stocks that do not have a CRSP share code of 10 or 11), and any stocks whose prices are less than $1 are also excluded. To capture ﬁrm fundamentals, the paper uses a total of 13 ﬁrm fundamental ratios, namely profitability (ROA, ROE, Operating Proﬁt Before Depreciation, EBITDA/TA, and Cash Flow Margin), ﬁnancial leverage and strength (Debt Ratio, Cash Flow to Debt, Long-term Debt to Book Equity, and Free Cash Flow to Operating Cash Flow), eﬃciency of asset management (Inventory Turnover, Asset Turnover Ratio, Sales to Invested Capital); and quality of earning and assets (Accruals Ratio). As ﬁrm fundamental ratios typically exhibit strong seasonality, ﬁrstly take the average of each ratio over the same quarter of the prior four years and then subtract the average from the ratio of the current quarter (equation 1, page 6). Secondly, to capture the unanticipated shocks in the seasonally adjusted fundamental ratios, for each selected seasonally adjusted ﬁnancial ratio, calculate a change in the ratio between two adjacent quarters by taking the diﬀerence of the seasonally adjusted ratio for each stock (equation 2, page 7).
After that, use the partial least square (PLS) approach to aggregate the relevant information contained in all 13 fundamental ratios, by constructing a PLS index for the level of the seasonally adjusted fundamental ratios as well as for the unanticipated changes of the seasonally adjusted fundamental ratios (this has two steps, equations 3 and 4 – page 8, the slope of the first regression is used in the second one). Lastly, forecast the return in quarter t+1, while using information only up to quarter t. This is made by estimating the regression parameters (a0,a1,a2) from equation 22 at page 29. Take the average of estimated coefficients over past ten quarters and calculate the forecasted return as the average a0 plus average a1 multiplied by the PLS of quarter t-1 and plus average a2 multiplied by the PLS of quarter t (do this for every stock i). Sort the stocks into decile portfolios based on the forecasted returns and long the top decile, while shorting the bottom decile. The strategy is rebalanced quarterly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.