Do company managers strategically announce their bad earnings news at certain times? Actual academic research shows they do. The timing of the release affects the market’s response to firms’ earnings and firms release news strategically. Research shows that Friday evening announcements present by far the worst news of all day-time combinations and equity prices subsequently strongly drift according to earnings announcement surprise. The research measures the PEAD after good news announcements, in addition to the PEAD after bad news, and considers a long position in firms that announce positive news and a short position in firms that announce negative news. Earnings announcement drift is much stronger for these “Friday evening announcers”, and therefore profitable trading strategy could be built upon this finding.

Fundamental reason
Academic research states that managers are rational when they time earnings announcements, which implies that they can ultimately benefit from timing such announcements. At the firm level, successfully hiding news implies that the market does not fully incorporate the news into prices and has a delayed reaction to the earnings announced at a given timing cell. At the individual level, opportunistic announcements allow managers to benefit from buying or selling the company’s shares after the public information is released, and before the information is fully impounded into prices.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all US stocks whose market value is above $100 million and whose share price is above $2 and whose earnings announcements are scheduled on Friday. The strategy creates portfolios depending on the magnitude of an earnings surprise. The empirical distribution of SUEs at year t-1 is used to calculate the medians of the positive and negative SUE values. Then, each month, investor constructs portfolios in year t by going long shares of firms whose SUE value is above the median of the positive SUE distribution and short shares of firms whose SUE value is below the median of the negative SUE distribution. Firms that make earnings announcements with positive (negative) SUEs over its median value enter the long (short) portfolio at the end of the month (or the following month if the announcement is made on the last trading day of the month). Stock remains in the portfolio for 12 months during the period that starts in month t+1 and ends in month t+12 (inclusive), where t is the announcement month. Stocks are equally weighted, and the portfolio is rebalanced on a monthly basis.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Partially - The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. See table 5, Panel C from source academic paper for the performance of the short-only leg of this strategy (1,02%, highly statistically significant).