In this paper, the authors developed a new neural network-based method for measuring aggregate analyst sentiment. An extensive literature on sell-side equity analysts documents one fact. Analysts make predictable and persistent forecast errors due to strategic reasons and also behavioral factors. The sentiment measure indicates the gap between analysts’ aggregated forecast optimism and their NN model-predicted optimism during the same time period.

The authors trained neural network (NN) models that predicted firm-level forecast errors of an individual analyst’s quarterly earnings forecasts to measure the predictable component of forecast error that reflects analyst-specific autocorrelation in forecast errors. The key insight of this paper is that analyst biases across firms are likely to be correlated. Analyst-level neural networks were trained to identify these analyst-specific biases by pooling each analyst’s forecasts across firms. The authors found that the accuracy of NN model predictions and their relative performance compared to benchmark linear models improve as the level of aggregation increases. By the authors: “The sentiment measure captures deviations from predictable behavior: It is positive when analysts as a group are more optimistic than the NN model predictions and negative when analysts are more pessimistic than the NN model predictions”. It is essential to note that analyst sentiment time series exhibits significant variation, and there are time periods when the sentiment is extremely positive and negative.

The study’s main findings suggested that using artificial intelligence and machine learning methods can help identify novel predictable patterns in stock returns. Paradoxically relatively simple learning models like two-layered feed-forward neural networks can effectively capture analyst-level biases and obtain a novel measure of aggregate-level analyst sentiment.

Fundamental reason
The main reason for the functionality of the strategy proposed in this paper is the logic behind the used neural network usage and evaluation of outcomes. A new method was developed for decomposing analysts’ aggregate forecast errors into predictable and non-predictable components. Analyst-level neural networks were trained to identify these analyst-specific biases by pooling each analyst’s forecasts across firms. With the aim to measure the predictable component of forecast error (it reflects analyst-specific autocorrelation in forecast errors) it was trained neural network (NN) models that predict firm-level forecast errors of an individual analyst’s quarterly earnings forecasts. This prediction forecast is based on analysts’ four lagged analyst forecast errors on that for the same company. Each year, a separate two-layer, feed-forward NN model was trained for each analyst using all previous forecast errors of the analyst. The NN-based modeling approach provides several advantages over standard linear regression models. By the authors: “For example, if some analysts’ future forecast errors can only be predicted based on their most recent quarterly forecast errors, while in other analysts’ cases older forecast errors also have incremental predictive ability, the NN model would capture these analyst-specific differ ences. More importantly, the NN model can capture non-linear relations between dependent and independent variables, which can be particularly relevant in predicting analyst behavior after large earnings surprises”. The sentiment measure captures deviations from predictable behavior: It is positive when analysts as a group are more optimistic than the NN model predictions and negative when analysts are more pessimistic than the NN model predictions.

Simple trading strategy
Dataset:

The primary data set contains quarterly earnings announcements and associated earnings forecasts, obtained from the Institutional Broker Estimates System (I/B/E/S) detail history file. Additionally, the authors used stock-level data from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), and various firm attributes from Compustat. For each analyst, was consider only the latest earnings forecast or revision before the earnings announcement date. An analyst’s Forecast Error (FE) was defined as the difference between the earnings per share forecast and the actual earnings per share in I/B/E/S (Equation 1).

Estimating Linear and Neural Network Models:

Like late studies that use artificial intelligence methods to generate improved analyst forecasts (for instance Van Binsbergen et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2021, 2022), it was developed a neural network-based, artificially-intelligent model for predicting errors in individual forecasts. Then it was aggregated the predicted forecast errors at the firm, industry, and market levels. Also a comparison the predictions of the model to a benchmark linear regression model that uses the same data and explanatory variables was made.
To predict the forecast error, the authors employed a two-layer, traditional “feed-forward” neural network model, with one hidden layer and 15 neurons, that learns about the behaviour of each analyst. The choice of the neural network’s hyperparameters derives from Gu et al. (2020), who find shallow learning with fewer hidden layers outperforms deeper learning.

After building analyst-level neural network models trained with analysts’ historical forecasts, an analyst’s lagged forecast errors was used for a firm to predict her future forecast error for the same firm using her trained model. More details in part 2. of the paper.

The empirical analysis was started by evaluating NN model’s ability to predict analyst level forecast errors. Data from 1984 to 1996 was used as the initial training sample period and report expanding window estimates for the 1997 to 2021 period. The authors evaluated the performance of the NN model at the individual, firm, industry, and market levels. The authors also used several performance measures to assess the predictive ability of linear and NN models (more details in parts 3.1. – 3.4.).

Aggregate Analyst Sentiment.

The results showed that the NN model can predict the sign and magnitude of analysts’ forecast errors at the market level. The authors used the NN model predictions to decompose the average market-level forecast error into two components: Model-predicted forecast error and “abnormal optimism,” the latter of which is not captured by the model. The model-predicted component is based on the informational content in historical forecast errors, while the residual component captures abnormal optimism relative to the predicted error, which we label as analyst sentiment. The abnormal component reflects forecasting behavior that differs from analysts’ expected normal behavior based on the previous forecast errors. It can capture systematic time period-specific biases that cannot be predicted from the previous forecast errors. In Long−Short portfolio strategy, they sorted industries by their analyst sentiment estimates. The sentiment measure captures analysts’ overoptimism and overpessimism, and prediction is that stocks in high-sentiment industries underperform relative to stocks inlow-sentiment industries.The “Long” (“Short”) portfolio contains firms in the five industries with the lowest (highest) Industry-Level Analyst Sentiment while the “Short” portfolio contains firms in the five industries with the highest Industry-Level Analyst Sentiment. All portfolios are value-weighted and rebalanced monthly. A more detailed explanation can be found in part 4.

What Explains Variation in Analyst Sentiment?

The performance of the NN model at the aggregate market level coupled with the time series trend that the authors observed in the NN model prediction bring them to the next step of analyses, where they investigated what explains variation in our analyst sentiment measure over time. A more details can be found in part 5.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Unfortunately, the presented paper provides no further commentary on possible hedging against equities market downturns.