With the continuous expansion of cryptocurrency popularity, the need for estimation mechanisms of coin performance arose. Partially, this digital asset seems to mirror the equity market tendencies; however, the significant differences between the two still create a space for academic research. Even though some authors pay attention to the determinants of crypto payoffs, only a few scrutinize the actual cryptocurrency factor portfolios. In particular, the limited research stems from the specific crypto payoff distribution, limiting the application of commonly used performance-measuring methods. To avoid the issue, the authors of the augmented factor model implemented almost stochastic dominance (ASD). By utilizing publicly available information about the broad sample of cryptocurrencies, the paper identifies 13 dominant factor portfolios outperforming four benchmarks (S&P 500, 10-year T-Bond, 1-month T-Bill, cryptocurrency index). Moreover, the research paper disintegrates cryptocurrency portfolios into the long and short legs, aiming to separate their distinctive effects, mainly due to the inability of short-selling most of the cryptos. Size, momentum, volatility, and volume were identified as the four main factors. This screener addition examines the mean absolute daily return of cryptos; hence, it belongs to the volatility factor group. The research results showed that the volatility-versus-return relationship significantly differs from the nature of the stock market. Traders accepting high crypto volatility are rewarded with excessive returns.Although the negative relationship between the return and volatility is regularly affirmed in stocks, cryptocurrencies seem to develop differently. In the case of the volatility factor, the portfolio based on the MEANABS factor earned the highest return while being the second most volatile portfolio out of the whole sample. Therefore, the volatility risk premium seems to be present in the cryptocurrency market. Moreover, the short sell inability pays off with liquidity risk premium, also not usually present in the stock market. Concerning the dominant portfolios, the reasons for functionality are clear; risks premia support the outperformance of cryptos. Besides, the research is backed by several robustness tests. The paper also demonstrated that the long-only strategies surpass the short legs. This finding is consistent with the research regarding equity factors (e.g. Freyberger et al. (2020)).

Fundamental reason
Although the negative relationship between the return and volatility is regularly affirmed in stocks, cryptocurrencies seem to develop differently. In the case of the volatility factor, the portfolio based on the MEANABS factor earned the highest return while being the second most volatile portfolio out of the whole sample. Therefore, the volatility risk premium seems to be present in the cryptocurrency market. Moreover, the short sell inability pays off with liquidity risk premium, also not usually present in the stock market. Concerning the dominant portfolios, the reasons for functionality are clear; risks premia support the outperformance of cryptos. Besides, the research is backed by several robustness tests. The paper also demonstrated that the long-only strategies surpass the short legs. This finding is consistent with the research regarding equity factors (e.g. Freyberger et al. (2020)).

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of 1204 cryptocurrencies. The “MEANABS” factor is defined as the ratio of the mean absolute daily return to the dollar volume in the portfolio formation week. To form a portfolio, the investment universe is arranged into quintiles (from lowest to highest) based on the factor. Go long on the fifth quintile, go short on the first quintile (however, this might be problematic since it is almost impossible to short many cryptocurrencies apart from the most popular ones). The strategy is rebalanced weekly and market-capitalization weighted.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Based on our own research “Five Small Shards of Insight Hidden in Data”, cryptocurrencies are positively correlated with other cryptos and especially Bitcoin. The problem is that the Bitcoin is correlated with equity market – especially during equity downturns, where both cryptos and equities suffer significant drawdowns.