Since financial markets are difficult to predict, investors have a pleasure imagining their future gains while they fear the pain of potential losses. A wide range of powerful investor emotions can collapse into two broad emotional states, such as ‘excitement’ and ‘anxiety’ reflecting the emotional states of the brain (Kuhnen and Knutson, 2011). Hence, thoughts of the potential gains (/losses) could create feelings of excitement (/anxiety). It may be problematic to measure and quantify the emotion since it can’t be directly observed. A study by Hasan, Kumar and Taffler (2021) proposes a novel method to measure investor anxiety and excitement and analyzes the impact of these fundamental emotions on stock returns in a cross-section. To do so, the authors construct a market emotion index (MEI) that helps them identify the market segments that are more sensitive to the changes in investors’ emotions. Then, by running the regression of excess stock returns on the MEI index, they estimate an emotion beta for each stock. The results have shown that high (low) emotion beta stocks exhibit higher (lower) returns in the near future. Specifically, the fifth quintile (the highest emotion beta stocks) outperformed the first quintile (the lowest emotion beta stocks) by 0.54% per month on a risk-adjusted basis in a quintile value-weighted portfolio. This outperformance persists for up to four months and then turns insignificant. Accordingly, buying the high emotion beta stocks and selling the low emotion beta stocks with a monthly rebalancing forms a profitable trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
Investors tend to enter into emotional relationships with stocks that could affect their perceptions of risk and return. A study by Kuhnen and Knutson (2011) points out that even sophisticated investors may be prone to emotional conflict as many of the investment decisions they make can be affected by their emotions. Interestingly, Posner, Russell, and Peterson (2005) suggest that it is the intensity of the emotional charge driving the investors rather than its valence. Accordingly, stocks with a greater (smaller) emotional utility for investors are met with a higher (lower) propensity to invest and therefore exhibit higher (lower) subsequent returns. For example, when the stock market is bullish, excited participants will act as trend chasers, push prices further up. In parallel, when the market is bearish with anxiety dominating, contrarian investors can get excited about prospects of high returns in the future and create price pressure. In both cases, the excess buying pressure generates higher returns in the near future, which eventually gets corrected. Moreover, this phenomenon is distinct from the well-studied behavioral factors such as mood, sentiment, and economic and policy uncertainty.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks with share codes 10 and 11 listed on the NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq with positive book equity that have a share price of more than $5 and less than $1,000. Firstly, for each month, construct a market emotion index (MEI) as MEI = (Excitement – Anxiety) / (Excitement + Anxiety) where “Excitement” and “Anxiety” represent the respective excitement and anxiety-related word counts regarding the S&P 500 index in that month derived from articles in 21 national and local level newspapers (see Appendix A1, for example: The New York Times, The Washington Post, Wall Street Journal and USA Today). Secondly, at the beginning of each month, estimate each stock’s emotion beta using the monthly rolling regression of excess stock returns on the MEI over the latest sixty months while controlling for the market (MKT), small-minus big (SMB), and high-minus-low (HML) factors. Thirdly, take the absolute value of estimated emotion betas. Then, sort all stocks into quintiles according to their emotion beta in absolute value, where quintile 1 (5) contains stocks with the lowest (highest) emotion beta. Buy the quintile 5 (the highest emotion beta stocks) and sell the quintile 1 (the lowest emotion beta stocks). The portfolio is value-weighed and rebalanced monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Strategy has positive and significant market beta (Table 3).