It has commonly been found in the academic research that insider stock purchases/sales are followed by positive/negative abnormal returns, suggesting they are motivated by an informational advantage. The easiest strategy is to follow every insider’s trade. However, recent academic research shows that not only isolated trades are informational. The investor should be paying attention to sequences of trades exercised during several months as often the information possessed by insiders have a long-lasting effect (and insiders trade for a longer time). Abnormal performance after the finished sequence of insiders’ trades is attractive and allows investors to create an interesting long-short trading strategy.

Fundamental reason
A long list of research papers suggests that insiders have special non-public information about companies’ future outlook and use that information in their timing of trades. There are times when an insiders’ informational advantage may be longer-lived. It may, therefore, be that sequences of trades spread over longer horizons are also motivated by private information that takes longer to be incorporated into prices. If this is the case, research expects abnormal returns favourable for the insiders, but not until the trade sequences end.

Simple trading strategy
Investment universe consists of stocks from NYSE, Nasdaq and AMEX. Each month, the investor finds out all insiders trades related to stocks in the investment universe. For each insider, investor aggregate trades on a calendar month basis, and treat months as sales or purchase months based on the net of their transactions. Trades that can be characterized as “opportunistic” (investor removes all trades by insiders that trade in the same calendar month in three consecutive years, since they may be classified as “routine” traders who are unlikely to trade on information). The investor then classifies sequenced trades if they occur in consecutive months in the past. The investor uses only trades of top executives as signals for the trading strategy (CEOs etc.)

An investor identifies the end of a sequence of trade months by the second month after the final trade, after which the stock can be added to a portfolio (the investor waits for a month to actually confirm that a sequence of trades has ended). The firms are held in the portfolio for one month after which the portfolio is then rebalanced based on newly completed sequenced trades.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of proposed trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, the short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.