Novel research about momentum in the Indian market has been published by Srivastava, Srivastava and Singhal. The paper consists of various variants of momentum in the stocks, time-series momentum based on daily data and both time-series, and cross-sectional momentum based on intraday data. Moreover, each variant includes various lookback and rebalancing periods. However, from one of many possible representative strategies, we had to pick one strategy, and from now on, our focus would be centred around the time-series momentum based on intraday data. Momentum is a well-known factor that is connected with the strong predictive power of past returns that influence future returns. Theory suggests that there should be a price-continuation and therefore, assets that have performed well would continue performing in such a way, and vice versa. Aforementioned leads to a strategy that buys positive returning securities and shorts negative returning securities. According to this paper, an increase in the rebalancing frequency also increases the returns of this strategy. Or in other words, the eﬃcacy of intraday momentum strategies increases on increasing turnover. However, the strategy can be simply traded since it uses liquid futures. Last but not least, it’s unknown whether this strategy works in the U.S. market, but it may work, and maybe further research would shed light on this topic.

Fundamental reason
The momentum anomalies cannot be explained with the eﬃcient market hypothesis, where the price change is warranted only by changes in demand and supply or new information. Both long term and short term momentum strategies usually ﬁnd reasons for functionality in behavioural ﬁnance which attributes momentum to various behavioural biases connected with irrational investors like herding behaviour, conﬁrmation bias, initial under-reaction or delayed overreaction, and according to the paper, this novel intraday momentum is not different and could also be explained by the behavioural biases. Since the eﬃcacy of momentum strategies is increasing as both look back and rebalancing frequencies are decreasing, it is natural that very short term momentum that is frequently rebalanced would be profitable. However, the investor must also consider trading costs which limit the rebalancing periods, because the periods cannot be too short since the strategy could be unprofitable.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of futures on stocks in the Nifty 50 Index. The lookback period is three days, and the period of rebalancing is 60 minutes. Investor goes long futures with positive momentum and goes short futures with negative momentum. The realization of the strategy requires knowledge of risk-budgeting (simplified). The risk budgets are taken to be proportional to the absolute value of normalized indicator values, and the total risk of the allocation is set to 15% annualized for all indicators. The target risk of the allocation is 10%, and there is no optimization on weights, but the weights are scaled in a way that the risk is set to 15%, and the sum of weights or exposure is of the scale of 100%.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - Source and related research papers don’t offer insight into correlation structure of this trading strategy to equity market risk; therefore, we do not know if this strategy can be used as a hedge/diversification during the time of market crisis. The strategy is built as a long-short, but it can be split into two parts. The long leg of the strategy is surely strongly correlated to the equity market; however, a short-only leg might be used as a hedge during bad times. Rigorous backtest is, however, needed to determine return/risk characteristics and correlation.