Economic policy uncertainty (EPU) is the uncertainty about fiscal, regulatory, or monetary policy caused by government policymakers. It affects not only the real economy but also the financial markets. A study by Baker et al. (2016) has shown that high EPU is associated with increased stock price volatility, a rise in unemployment, and reduced investments in policy-sensitive sectors. Motivated by the thrive in the hedge fund industry in recent years, this paper addresses a previously unexplored question: does EPU affect hedge fund returns? Although hedge funds have received plenty of academic attention, this study is the first to examine the EPU risk in the cross-section of US hedge fund returns. In particular, to study the EPU risk, authors sort the funds on their EPU beta into equally-weighted decile portfolios. The results have shown that funds whose returns are positively (negatively) correlated with changes in EPU earn lower (higher) expected returns. Specifically, the highest EPU beta decile (hedge funds with the highest EPU beta) underperformed the lowest EPU beta decile (hedge funds with the lowest EPU beta) by 0.49% per month with a t-statistic of 2.65. The documented negative EPU premium is similar to the findings of Bali et al. (2017), who found the negative EPU premium in the cross-section of stock returns in US equities. Naturally, betting against uncertainty beta results in a profitable trading strategy. A strategy that takes each month a long position in hedge funds with the lowest EPU beta exhibits an annual return of 8.89% with a corresponding Sharpe Ratio of 0.62. Besides, variations of this strategy that rebalance after 3, 6, and 12 months earn comparable annual returns of 8.59%, 9.03%, and 8.15%, respectively.

Fundamental reason
Brogaard and Detzel (2015) report a negative contemporaneous correlation between changes in EPU and stock market returns. Accordingly, a high EPU is associated with increased stock volatility and represents a risk for the investors. Risk-averse investors prefer a smooth equity curve, so they demand more (less) of those assets whose returns are positively (negatively) correlated with the changes in EPU. Consequently, the assets with a high (low) EPU beta become overvalued (undervalued), and their expected returns are lower (higher). Moreover, the conventional risk factors in Fung and Hsieh’s (2001) seven-factor and Fama and French’s (2015) five-factor model can’t explain a negative relation between the asset’s EPU beta and the expected return. Last but not least, the negative EPU premium in the cross-section of hedge fund returns is robust to controlling for share restrictions, exposures to other risks, the illiquidity of assets held by hedge funds, and excluding crisis periods.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of all hedge funds from Lipper TASS and Hedge Fund Research databases. Exclude funds that have less than $5 million AUM and less than 36 monthly observations. Firstly, to obtain the orthogonalized EPU index regress the newspaper-based EPU index for US of Baker et al. (2016) on the default spread, S&P 500 aggregate dividend yield, US GDP, the monthly inflation rate, the real interest rate, the term spread, and the US monthly unemployment rate as indicated in equation (2). The estimated residual in the aforementioned regression represents the EPU index orthogonalized to macroeconomic fundamentals. At the beginning of each month, estimate the EPU beta for each fund by regressing the fund’s excess returns in the latest 36 months on excess market returns and changes in orthogonalized EPU index. Then sort funds into equally-weighted decile portfolios according to their EPU betas. Buy the portfolio with the lowest EPU beta (low-EPU hedge funds) and rebalance monthly.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
No - Since it is impossible to short hedge funds, the strategy should be implemented as the long-only, and the performance is informative primarily about the difference in performance. Therefore, the strategy bets on economic policy uncertainty “uninsured” funds, and it is expected that it would not perform well during crises.