Authors argue that ranking stocks based on their market beta to determine the components of a zero-cost investment strategy’s long and short legs may not always be consistent with a more robust notion of stochastic dominance (SD). Therefore, they propose intuitive SD prefiltering rules to improve the beta-based investment strategy. The basic principle is to exclude stocks that the market index has dominated during the previous year from the long leg of the strategy and stocks that dominated the market from the short leg of the strategy. Compared to the conventional the betting-against-beta (BAB) portfolio, chosen third-order SD (TSD)-enhanced BAB exhibits superior performance in terms of a wide range of performance and risk measures, including abnormal returns relative to various risk-factor models during different macroeconomic regimes.

Fundamental reason
Low-beta investing has attracted substantial interest from academics and practitioners due to its superior performance, which contradicts expectations drawn from classical finance theories. Stochastic dominance is closely linked to decision-making under uncertainty. If one distribution stochastically dominates the other one by second order, all risk-averse investors will prefer the former to the latter. Furthermore, another benefit of this approach is that whether the second order (SSD) or the third order (TSD) SD prefiltering is likely to improve the performance of different diversified long-short trading strategies, such as strategies based on various market anomalies.

Simple trading strategy
The investment universe consists of common stocks listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ. As a result, at the beginning of each month each stock is characterized by its estimated beta (eq. (2)) and indicators of whether it is dominated by the market, it dominates the market, or it lies in the same dominance class with the market portfolio (eq. (3)) according to TSD criterion. (Third-order stochastic dominance (SD) [TSD] prefiltering criterion is the procedure of excluding stocks that have dominated the market during the preceding year by the third order [utilize eq. (1)] from the short leg and stocks that the market has previously dominated from the long leg by the methodology of SD-related tests [in this paper used Davidson (2009) on eq. (4)].) We next create long-short TSD-enhanced BAB portfolios consistent with Frazzini and Pedersen (2014). The long leg of the portfolios includes half of stocks with the market betas below the median, excluding those stocks that are dominated by the market by TSD. The short leg of the portfolios includes half of stocks with the market betas above the median, excluding those stocks that dominate the market by TSD. The portfolios are held for one month and then rebalanced.

Hedge for stocks during bear markets
Not known - While high-beta stocks often suffer most during equity bear markets, paper does not describe presented strategies as a possible hedge against large drawdowns in long-only portfolios.